How a Question Becomes Part of the 
American Community Survey

December 2023

The U.S. Census Bureau must balance the information 
needs of a growing, changing nation with respect for 
the privacy and time of the American public.

Additionally in conjunction with the Department of 
Commerce’s Office of Chief Counsel, the Census Bureau 
does a periodic validation of the uses of all questions to 
ensure there is a legal basis for them.

Adding a question or making a change to the American 
Community Survey (ACS) involves extensive testing, 
review, and evaluation over a 5-year period. This ensures  ments in testing methods, availability of resources, and 
the change is necessary and will produce quality, useful 
information for the nation.

urgency of the request, the process generally follows 
the evaluation and testing timeline below:

Though the timing may vary depending on improve-

Preliminary

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Implementation

Step 1.
A federal agency proposes a new or changed survey question.

Step 2.
The office of Management and Budget (OMB) and Census Bureau decide whether the change has merit.

Step 3.
Create wording options.

Step 4.
Test different ways to ask the question.

Step 5.
Evaluate question performance in a ﬁeld test.

Step 6.
Census Bureau solicits public comment;
OMB approves or rejects change.

Step 7. 
Census Bureau
implements the change.

1.  A federal agency proposes a new or changed survey 

5.  Evaluate question performance in a ﬁeld test.

question.

The requesting agency must show that it needs frequent data at 
small geographies, that no other sources of information are 
available, and that its mission would be compromised if the 
question was not added or changed.

2.  The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and 

Census Bureau decide whether the change has merit.

Legal staff review the proposal to determine if it meets the 
legislative requirements. The Census Bureau and OMB decide 
whether the request merits further consideration, in consultation 
with the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy Subcommitee on 
the ACS.

3.  Create wording options.

Subject matter experts identify ways to ask each question using 
different words and phrases.

4.  Test different ways to ask the question.

The Census Bureau solicits public comment and OMB approval for 
the ﬁeld test. Census Bureau staff ﬁnalize the wording for the test, 
create instruments to ﬁeld the test, develop the systems to 
process the data collected, and conduct the test. Then, they 
tabulate and analyze the results and provide them to the federal 
agency that requested the change.

6.  Census Bureau solicits public comment; OMB 

approves or rejects change.

The Census Bureau and requesting federal agency review the 
research results and decide whether to recommend implementa-
tion of the new or changed survey question. The Census Bureau 
solicits public comment through a Federal Register Notice to 
inform a ﬁnal decision in consultation with the OMB and the 
Interagency Council on Statistical Policy Subcommittee on the 
ACS.

Note: The Paperwork Reduction Act requires OMB approval of data collections that 
would impose a burden on the American public. It also requires a public comment 
period via the Federal Register.

The Census Bureau conducts cognitive interviews to gauge which 
wording is best understood and produces the most accurate 
results.

Subject matter experts review the cognitive testing results and 
recommend the version for ﬁeld testing.

7.  Census Bureau implements the change.

If approved by the OMB, the Census Bureau prepares to imple-
ment the change by updating systems, questionnaires, and 
materials. Implementation takes effect at the start of a calendar 
year.

Additional information on the American Community Survey, 
including the process for revising and adding questions, 
is available at <www.census.gov/ACS>.

