Using the American Community Survey 
Table-Based Summary File
What Data Users Need to Know

Issued October 2023

Acknowledgments

Mark Mather, associate vice president, U.S. Programs, Population 
Reference Bureau (PRB), and Kelvin Pollard, senior demographer, 
PRB, drafted this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census 
Bureau’s American Community Survey Office.

Nicole Scanniello and Gretchen Gooding, Census Bureau, contrib-
uted to the planning and review of the handbook series.

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of 
Deborah M. Stempowski, associate director for Decennial Census 
Programs, and Donna M. Daily, Chief, American Community Survey 
Office.

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the 
review and release of these handbooks include Grace Clemons, Thu 
Dang, Charles Gamble, Hsin-Hsing Lee, Vicki Mack, Bonan Ren, 
Nathan Walters, and Kai Wu.

Stacey Barber, Steven Brown, and Paula Lancaster provided publica-
tion management, graphic design and composition, editorial review, 
and 508 compliancy for print and electronic media under the direc-
tion of Corey Beasley, Chief of the Graphic and Editorial Services 
Branch, Public Information Office.

Using the American Community Survey 
Table-Based Summary File
What Data Users Need to Know

Issued October 2023

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Robert L. Santos, 
Director

Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau,  
Using the American Community 
Survey Table-Based Summary File: 
What Data Users Need to Know, 
U.S. Government Publishing Office, 
Washington, DC,  
October 2023.

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Robert L. Santos, 
Director

Ron S. Jarmin, 
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer

Deborah M. Stempowski, 
Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs

Vacant, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office

Contents

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File:  
    What Data Users Need to Know  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

1. Overview of the ACS Summary File  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

2. How To Use the ACS Table-Based Summary File . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

3. Tools and Resources for the ACS Summary File . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File  iii 
What All Data Users Need to Know  iii

U.S. Census BureauThis page is intentionally blank.

USING THE AMERICAN COMMUNITY SURVEY 
TABLE-BASED SUMMARY FILE: WHAT DATA 
USERS NEED TO KNOW 

Introduction

The American Community Survey (ACS) Table-Based 
Summary File is a pipe-delimited text file that contains 
all the Detailed Tables from the ACS. Data users with 
programming skills and access to statistical software 
can use the Summary File to download and analyze 
ACS data for a wide range of geographic areas.

This guide provides an overview of the ACS Table-
Based Summary File and how it can be used to access 
data on America’s communities.

Starting with the 2022 ACS data releases, the table-
based format will be the only format available. The 
2021 data releases were the final releases of the 
original sequence-based format. For information 
about accessing the ACS Summary File in the 
original sequence-based format, refer to Using the 
American Community Survey Summary File: What 
Data Users Need to Know.1

What Is the ACS?

The ACS is a nationwide survey designed to  
provide communities with reliable and timely social, 
economic, housing, and demographic data every 
year. A separate annual survey, called the Puerto 
Rico Community Survey (PRCS), collects similar 
data about the population and housing units in 
Puerto Rico. The U.S. Census Bureau uses data 
collected in the ACS and the PRCS to provide 
estimates on a broad range of population, housing 
unit, and household characteristics for states, 
counties, cities, school districts, congressional 
districts, census tracts, block groups, and many 
other geographic areas.

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 3.5 
million addresses with survey information collected 
nearly every day of the year. Data are pooled across 
a calendar year to produce estimates for that year. 
As a result, ACS estimates reflect data that have 
been collected over a period of time rather than for 
a single point in time, as in the decennial census, 
which is conducted every 10 years and provides 
population counts as of April 1 of the census year.

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been 
collected over a 12-month period and are available 
for geographic areas with a population of at least 
65,000. Starting with the 2014 ACS, the Census 
Bureau has been producing “1-year Supplemental 
Estimates”—simplified versions of popular ACS 
tables—for geographic areas with a population of 
at least 20,000. The Census Bureau combines 5 
consecutive years of ACS data to produce multiyear 
estimates for geographic areas with fewer than 
65,000 residents. These 5-year estimates represent 
data collected over a period of 60 months.

For more detailed information about the ACS—
how to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, 
understanding multiyear estimates, knowing 
which geographic areas are covered in the ACS, 
and how to access ACS data on the Census Bureau’s 
website—refer to the Census Bureau’s handbook 
on Understanding and Using American Community 
Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.2

¹ U.S. Census Bureau, Using the American Community Survey 

Summary File: What Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/
programs-surveys/acs/library/handbooks/summary-file.html>. 

² U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/library/handbooks/general.
html>.

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File  1 
What All Data Users Need to Know  1

U.S. Census Bureau1. OVERVIEW OF THE ACS SUMMARY FILE

The American Community Survey (ACS) Summary 
File is a unique data product that includes all 
estimates and margins of error (MOEs) from 
the Detailed Tables for all geographies that are 
published for the ACS. The Detailed Tables are 
designed for advanced data users or those who 
want access to the most comprehensive ACS tables. 
They begin with the letters “B” for base tables and 
“C” for collapsed tables (e.g., B01001 or C15002). 
The collapsed tables cover the same topics as the 
base tables, but with fewer categories. Other ACS 
data products, such as Subject Tables and Data 
Profiles, are created from the Detailed Tables and, 
therefore, are not available in the ACS Summary 
File.3

The 2005 through 2021 ACS Summary Files were 
released in a sequence-based format containing the 
estimates and MOEs from the tables in two separate 
files. The sequences excluded metadata such as the 
titles of the tables, the descriptions of the rows, and 
the names of the geographic areas. The metadata 
and MOEs were stored in other files that users 
had to merge with the data files to reproduce the 
complete tables.

Beginning with the 2018 ACS, the U.S. Census 
Bureau began testing a streamlined format that 
the estimates and MOEs were grouped by table ID. 
Under this table-based format, a file is posted for 
each table that contains the estimates and MOEs 
for all available geographies. Users can easily select 
the individual table(s), only needing to merge in 
a separate file containing geographic labels to 
reproduce the complete table(s). The table-based 
format will be the only format available starting with 
the 2022 ACS data release.

The ACS Summary File can be challenging to use 
and is intended for advanced users who work with 
statistical software, like SAS or Python. The Census 
Bureau provides SAS programs that can be used to 
access and process the data, as well as instructions 
for using Excel to merge the geography file with a 
sample data table in the Table-Based ACS Summary 
File format.4 Before using the Summary File, users 
should first check if the data of interest are easily 
available for download on data.census.gov—the 
Census Bureau’s data dissemination platform.5

³ For information about the types of ACS tables that are available, 

refer to the U.S. Census Bureau’s “Table IDs Explained" webpage at 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/data-tables/table-
ids-explained.html>.

⁴ U.S. Census Bureau, “Instructions on How to Read American 
Community Survey Geography Names into Summary File Tables Using 
Excel,” <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_
file/2021/table-based-SF/documentation/ACS_Table_Based_SF_
Excel_Import%20GEO%20Names_Tool.pdf>. 

⁵ U.S. Census Bureau, “<https://data.census.gov>."

Benefits and Uses of the ACS Summary 
File’s Table-Based Format

The table-based format for the ACS Summary File 
provides access to each detailed table for all available 
geographies. The main benefit of the table-based 
format is that for each table, estimates and MOEs are 
combined into a single file and only require data users 
to merge in a single file of geography labels to create 
complete tables. The new format enables data users 
to:

• Make comparisons across different geographic areas.
• Evaluate the precision of a particular estimate since 
each table’s estimates and MOEs are now in a single 
file.

• Access the ACS data needed since each table is now 
in a separate file and the supporting documentation 
has been simplified.

• Use either a statistical (e.g., SAS, SPSS, or Python) or 
spreadsheet (e.g., Excel) program to work with the 
Summary File tables.

The table-based format still allows users the  
ability to:

• Connect data across tables. For example, calculate 
the number of people living in census tracts with at 
least 30 percent of the population living in poverty.

• Filter the data based on specified criteria. For 
example, only extract data for table totals and 
selected estimates.

• Recode variables. For example, aggregate data 
across several categories or calculate rates and 
percentages.

• Produce tabulations across many subjects and 

geographies. For example, tables about educational 
attainment, poverty, disability, and commuting for all 
50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.

Geographies Covered

The ACS Summary File covers geographic areas based 
on “summary levels.” Summary levels range from 
very large reporting units such as “State,” to much 
smaller reporting units, such as “Census Tract.” 
Summary levels may nest within other geographic 
areas such as “State” to “County” to “Census Tract,” 
or they may cross between two or more geographic 
hierarchies to produce units that are only portions 
of geographic areas. For example, summary level 
“State-Place-County” crosses the “State-Place” 
hierarchy with the “State-County” hierarchy and 
may create units that cover only a portion of one 
county.

2  Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File 
2  What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauEach summary level has an assigned three-digit 
summary level code to help data users link each 
summary level to its appropriate use in a table, map, 
or other data summarization format. Here are some 
common summary levels used to identify types of 
geographic areas:6

Comparing Published Detailed Tables to 
the ACS Summary File

The ACS Summary File contains the same data as the 
Detailed Tables but in a more flexible format to allow 
data users to extract only the desired data.

• 010 Nation
• 020 Region
• 030 Division
• 040 State
• 050 State-County
• 140 State-County-Census Tract
• 250 American Indian Area/Alaska Native Area/ 

Hawaiian Home Land

• 310 Metropolitan Statistical Area/Micropolitan 

Statistical Area

• 500 State-Congressional District

Not all geographic levels are published for all 
ACS Summary File datasets. While all available 
geographic levels are available for the 5-year files, 
some levels are not available for the 1-year datasets 
as they may not meet the minimum population 
threshold of 65,000. For a list of the most common 
geographic levels published for the 1-year and 
5-year Summary Files (as well as for the 1-year 
Supplemental Files), refer to the “Areas Published” 
or “Reference Materials” webpages on the Census 
Bureau’s website.7 

Many resources are available to help users 
understand the ACS geographic terms and 
concepts. For additional information, refer to the 
Census Bureau’s “About Geographic Areas” and 
“Geography and ACS” webpages.8

⁶ A figure showing the complete geographic hierarchy for 
standard entities is available in the file “Standard Hierarchy of 
Census Geographic Entities” at <https://www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/
reference/geodiagram.pdf>. 

⁷ U.S. Census Bureau, “Areas Published,” <www.census.gov/
programs-surveys/acs/geography-acs/areas-published.html>. To 
view the complete list of geographic levels published, refer to the 
Census Bureau’s “Reference Materials" webpage at <www.census.gov/
programs-surveys/acs/geography-acs/reference-materials.html>.

⁸ U.S. Census Bureau, “About Geographic Areas,” <www.census.
gov/programs-surveys/geography/guidance/geo-areas.html> and  
 “Geography & ACS,” <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/
geography-acs.html>.

Figure 1.1 shows an example using a table  
from data.census.gov, and Figure 1.2 shows the 
corresponding estimates from the Summary File. 
The published table includes information such as the 
table ID (B17001), the table title “Poverty Status in 
the Past 12 Months by Sex by Age,” and the source 
file “2021 American Community Survey, 1-year 
estimates.” The body of the table provides the 
estimates and MOEs for each selected geography 
(e.g., Citrus County, Florida). The highlighted box 
shows that in 2021, there were 155,317 people whose 
poverty status was determined in Citrus County, and 
there were 25,014 people whose income in the past 12 
months was below the poverty level. (The MOEs for 
these estimates were ±2,105 and ±4,670, respectively.)

As conveyed in Figure 1.2, the Summary File does 
not contain any of the metadata included in the 
published table. Rather, the file only contains the 
geographic identifiers, estimates, and MOEs that are 
separated by pipes (i.e., vertical bar symbols).

Data Release Schedule and Notable 
Changes to the Summary File

You can learn more details about each data release 
by visiting the ACS Data Releases webpage on the 
Census Bureau’s website.9 This webpage includes 
links to a schedule, notes about new estimates or new 
guidance, and technical information about geography 
and product changes. Check the updated data release 
information before using the Summary File as changes 
may impact the tables or geographies. You can also 
browse notes from previous years. 

⁹ U.S. Census Bureau, “Data Releases,” <www.census.gov/

programs-surveys/acs/news/data-releases.html>.

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File  3 
What All Data Users Need to Know  3

U.S. Census BureauFigure 1.1.  Excerpt From 2021 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates on Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2021 American Community Survey, 1-year estimates Detailed Tables, Table B17001, <https://data.census.gov/table?
q=B17001:+POVERTY+STATUS+IN+THE+PAST+12+MONTHS+BY+SEX+BY+AGE&g=050XX00US12017&tid=ACSDT1Y2021.B17001>.

Figure 1.2.  Excerpt From 2021 American Community Survey 1-Year Summary File

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2021 American Community Survey 1-year estimates, 1-year Summary File (table-based), Table B17001 (truncated). 
The complete file is available on the Census Bureau’s website at <www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2021/table-
based-SF/data/1YRData/acsdt1y2021-b17001.dat>.

4  Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File 
4  What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau2. HOW TO USE THE ACS TABLE-BASED 
SUMMARY FILE

The American Community Survey (ACS) Summary 
File is located on the U.S. Census Bureau’s file 
transfer protocol server.10 The easiest way to find 
the file is to start at the ACS website.11 From the 
ACS main page <www.census.gov/programs-
surveys/acs>, select the “Data” navigation link on 
the left. From there, click on the “Summary File” 
navigation link on the left, as shown in Figure 2.1.

The ACS Table-Based Summary File is in pipe-
delimited, Unicode Transformation Format (UTF-
8), which can easily be imported into software 
packages. The file is divided into three components: 
table labels (or table shells), geography labels 

10 U.S. Census Bureau, “American Community Survey Data via the 

File Transfer Protocol Server," <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/
acs/data/data-via-ftp.html>.

11 U.S. Census Bureau, “American Community Survey," <www.

census.gov/programs-surveys/acs>.

(or geography files), and data files. This section 
describes the components of the Summary File and 
the next section provides information and resources to 
put them together. 

• Data files: Data (including estimates, margins of 

error, and geographies) organized by table ID for the 
1-year or 5-year release:
 ° Folder: 1YRData, 5YRData.
 ° Example: The file acsdt1y2021-b01001.dat, variable 

B01001_E003 for 0400000US06 = 1,129,355.

• Geography labels (or geography files): All 

geography labels for the 1-year or 5-year data 
release:
 ° File name example: Geos20211YR.txt or 

Geos20215YR.txt.

 ° Variable label example: 0400000US06 = 

“California.”

Figure 2.1.  Locating the American Community Survey Summary File

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, “American Community Survey Data," <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data.html>.

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File  5 
What All Data Users Need to Know  5

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.2.  American Community Survey Summary File Components Associated With the 2021 Data Release

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, “American Community Survey Summary File," <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/summary-file.2021.
html#list-tab-1622397667>.

• Table labels (or table shells): A description of each 

line item in a table for the 1-year or 5-year data 
release:
 ° File name example: ACS20211YR_Table_Shells.txt 

or ACS20215YR_Table_Shells.txt.

 ° Variable label example: B01001_003 = “SEX BY 

AGE – Total Males Under 5 Years.”

Figure 2.2 shows the location of each of these 
components on the Census Bureau’s ACS Summary 
File website (2021 data release).

Data Files

Under the new table-based format, the ACS 
Summary File is organized by individual Detailed 
Tables that can be downloaded separately. Each 
data file contains estimates and margins of error 
(MOEs) for all available geographies. Figure 2.3  
lists a compressed file of the entire dataset.

Table 2.1 lists the naming convention used for a 
selected file in the 1-year data directory (for 2021). The 
file name, “acsdt1y,” refers to the ACS 1-year Detailed 
Tables; “2021” refers to the data collection year; and 
“b01001” refers to the table ID.

Figure 2.4 lists the first few rows from a 2017–2021 
ACS 5-year Summary File estimate for “Table B08121: 
Median Earnings in the Past 12 Months (In 2021 
Inflation-Adjusted Dollars) by Means of Transportation 
to Work.” The first row of the pipe-delimited file lists 
the variable labels, while subsequent rows list the 
ACS estimates for this table. The rows highlighted in 
the table list the results for the United States, rural 
areas, and the Midwest region (spotlighted in the 
“Geography Files” subsection).

The directory for the ACS 1-year Summary File is 
organized in a similar fashion.

6  Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File 
6  What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.3.  Summary File Directory for the 2021 American Community Survey 1-Year Data

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2021 American Community Survey, 1-year estimates, 1-year Summary File (table-based), data via file transfer 
protocol at <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2021/table-based-SF/data/1YRData/>.

Table 2.1.  Naming Convention for Files Within Data Directory

  Example

Name

Range or Type

acsdt1y2021-b01001.dat

acs

dt

1y

2021

-

Survey Name

American Community Survey

Table Type

Detailed Table

Period Covered

1y=1-year, 5y=5-year

Reference Year

ACS data year (last year of the period for multiyear periods)

Hyphen

b01001

Table Number

Unique table number

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File  7 
What All Data Users Need to Know  7

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.4.  Excerpt of 2017–2021 American Community Survey 5-Year Data File

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2017–2021 American Community Survey, 5-year estimates, Table B08121 (truncated). The complete file is available 
on the Census Bureau’s website at <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2021/table-based-SF/data/5YRData/
acsdt5y2021-b08121.dat>.

Geography Labels (or Geography Files)

The Census Bureau provides a separate file that 
contains labels for all geographies in both the 
1-year and 5-year ACS data files. You can use the 
geography identifier (GEO_ID) in this geography file 
to match the corresponding geographic identifier 
in each data file. Table 2.2 lists the contents of the 
geography file, which is available in .TXT format. Each 

row represents a different geographic area and the 
first four fields contain metadata such as the state 
postal abbreviation and summary level. Following 
those fields are the different geographic levels 
available for a particular data release. The fields in 
the table are left blank if the geographic level is not 
available for a particular data release. The GEO_ID is 
displayed in a red box in the table.

8  Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File 
8  What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauTable 2.2.  Contents of 2017–2021 American Community Survey 5-Year Geography File

Variable Name

Description

Code Type

FILEID
STUSAB
SUMLEVEL
COMPONENT
US
REGION
DIVISION
STATE
COUNTY
COUSUB
PLACE
TRACT
BLKGRP
CONCIT
AIANHH
AIANHHFP
AIHHTLI
AITS
AITSFP
ANRC
CBSA
CSA
METDIV
MACC
MEMI
NECTA
CNECTA
NECTADIV
UA
CDCURR
SLDU
SLDL
ZCTA5
SUBMCD
SDELM
SDSEC
SDUNI
UR
PCI
PUMA5
GEO_ID
NAME
BTTR
BTBG
TL_GEO_ID

Always equal to ACS Summary File identification
State Postal Abbreviation
Summary Level
Geographic Component
US
Census Region
Census Division
State (FIPS Code)
County of current residence
County Subdivision (FIPS)
Place (FIPS Code)
Census Tract
Block Group
Consolidated City
American Indian Area/Alaska Native Area/Hawaiian Home Land (Census/FIPS)
American Indian Area/Alaska Native Area/Hawaiian Home Land (LEFT BLANK)
American Indian Trust Land/Hawaiian Home Land Indicator
American Indian Tribal Subdivision (Census/FIPS)
American Indian Tribal Subdivision (LEFT BLANK)
Alaska Native Regional Corporation
Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Area
Combined Statistical Area
Metropolitan Statistical Area—Metropolitan Division
Metropolitan Area Central City
Metropolitan/Micropolitan Indicator Flag
New England City and Town Area
New England City and Town Combined Statistical Area
New England City and Town Area Division
Urban Area
Current Congressional District***
State Legislative District Upper
State Legislative District Lower
5-digit ZIP Code Tabulation Area
Subminor Civil Division (FIPS)
State-School District (Elementary)
State-School District (Secondary)
State-School District (Unified)
Urban/Rural
Principal City Indicator
Public Use Microdata Area—5% File
Geographic Identifier
Area Name
Tribal Tract
Tribal Block Group
Geographic Identifier (for TIGER/Line Shapefiles)

Record
Record
Record
Record
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic
Geographic

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2017–2021 American Community Survey, 5-year estimates, 5-year geography file, <https://www2.census.
gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2021/table-based-SF/documentation/Geos20215YR.txt>.

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File  9 
What All Data Users Need to Know  9

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.5.  Excerpt of 2017–2021 American Community Survey 5-Year Geography File

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2017–2021 American Community Survey, 5-year estimates, 5-year geography file (truncated). The complete 
file is available on the Census Bureau’s website at <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2021/table-based-SF/
documentation/Geos20215YR.txt>.

Figure 2.5 lists the first few rows and columns in 
the 5-year geography file. The first row displays 
the variable labels and the following rows include 
identifiers for all the geographic areas included in the 
Summary File. For example:

• In Row 2, the GEO_ID is “0100000US,” representing 

the United States.

• In Row 4, the GEO_ID is “0100043US,” representing 

rural areas.

• In Row 21, the GEO_ID is “0200000US2,” 

representing the Midwest region.

Table Labels (or Table Shells)

Table shells provide descriptions of each line item in 
the ACS Summary File without the estimates or MOEs 
filled in. They contain the table IDs, line numbers, 
unique IDs, and descriptions of each data cell in 
the Census Bureau’s Detailed Tables. Table shells 
are available 1 week before ACS data are released, 
allowing users to preview the contents of a new data 

release in advance. Figure 2.6 lists the columns and 
first few rows of the table shells for the 2017–2021  
ACS 5-year release.

Table IDs

All ACS tables have a table ID that follows specific 
naming conventions. This makes it easy to identify  
the same table across different tools such as on  
data.census.gov, the Summary File, and the application 
programming interface. You will need to know the 
table ID to identify the table from the Summary File. 
The Census Bureau provides a spreadsheet with table 
shells and associated table IDs for all Detailed Tables 
on their website.12

Table IDs consist of up to five elements. The first 
element is a letter that indicates the table type. 
For example, in Figure 2.7, the first letter is “B” 
indicating that the data are from a detailed (or 

12 U.S. Census Bureau, “Table Shells and Table List" can be found at 

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/
table-shells.html>.

10  Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File 
10  What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.6.  Excerpt of 2017–2021 American Community Survey 5-Year Table Shells

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2017–2021 American Community Survey, 5-year estimates, 5-year table shells (truncated). The complete file is 
available on the Census Bureau’s website at <www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2021/table-based-SF/documentation/
ACS20215YR_Table_Shells.txt>.

Figure 2.7.  American Community Survey Table IDs Explained

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Data Tables, “Table IDs Explained," <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/
data-tables/table-ids-explained.html>.

base) table. Table IDs that start with “C” refer to 
collapsed tables. The “B" tables have the most 
detail for a given topic, while “C" tables have 
collapsed categories.

The next two characters identify the subject of the 
table. Tables beginning with “01,” for example, are for 
tables in the age and sex subject. Each subject has a 
unique two-digit subject number.

The following three digits are a sequential table 
number that uniquely identifies a table within a given 
subject.

The fourth element is an alphabetic suffix that 
indicates the corresponding ACS table is repeated 
for different race and Hispanic origin groups. 
For example, table IDs ending in a “C” are for 
the American Indian and Alaska Native alone 
population. Those with an “H” suffix are for the  
non-Hispanic White population. Lastly, selected 
tables will have a final alphabetic suffix “PR” 
to indicate a table is available for Puerto Rico 
geographies only.

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File  11 
What All Data Users Need to Know  11

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.8.  Unique IDs for American Community Survey Variable Names Explained

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2021 American Community Survey, 1-year Summary File (table-based), Table B01001, <www2.census.gov/
programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2021/table-based-SF/data/1YRData/acsdt1y2021-b01001.dat>.

Refer to the Census Bureau’s website for more 
details about naming conventions and subject 
numbers for ACS tables.13

Unique ID for Variable Names

In the ACS Summary File, variable names for estimates 
and MOEs are displayed using a unique, alpha-numeric 
identifier (a unique ID).

The unique ID includes four elements: a table ID, an 
underscore, a letter to indicate the variable type  
(E = estimate, M = margin of error), and a three-digit 
line number, which identifies ACS estimates within 
each table.14 For example, in Table B01001, “Sex by 
Age,” the unique ID for the estimated total number 
of people who are American Indian and Alaska Native 
alone is “B01001C_E001” (Figure 2.8).

13 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, “Table IDs 

Explained," <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/data-
tables/table-ids-explained.html>.

14 The table shells for the American Community Survey Summary 

File provide unique IDs without the “variable type” displayed, since 
all rows represent estimates rather than MOEs. However, the data files 
include this information. 

12  Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File 
12  What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau3. TOOLS AND RESOURCES FOR THE ACS 
SUMMARY FILE

The U.S. Census Bureau provides several resources 
to help data users access and use the table-based 
American Community Survey (ACS) Summary File on 
the “Getting Started” webpage, including:

• Links to the ACS Summary File data.
• Release notes and supporting materials.
• Instructions on how to read ACS geography names 

into Summary File tables using Excel.

• Example programs to access the ACS Summary File 

using SAS or Python.

• Webinars that provide guidance on using the ACS 

Summary File in the table-based format.15

Reading the ACS Summary File Into 
Excel 

The Census Bureau provides a document that 
describes how data users without access to SAS or 
other statistical software—or who are seeking data 
for just a few tables—can retrieve ACS Summary 
File tables using Excel.16

• Select a table of interest from the Census Bureau’s 

file transfer protocol (FTP) directory and download it 
as a text file.

• In Excel, open the text file of the table of interest, 

using Excel’s Text Import Wizard. The table file uses 
pipe delimiters (i.e., vertical bar symbols).

• Download the corresponding geography file, either 
from the Table-Based Format webpage or the FTP 
website. Make sure the geography file corresponds 
with the ACS Summary File from where you selected 
the table. For example, if the data table comes 
from the 2021 1-year Summary File, you will want to 
download the 2021 ACS 1-year geography file. Like 
the data table, the geography file will be saved as a 
text file.

• Open the geography file in Excel using the Text 

Import Wizard. Like the table file, the geography file 
uses pipe delimiters.

• Once both the data table and geography files are 
open, use the VLOOKUP function to merge the 
geography names into the data table.

15 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Summary File, 

“Getting Started," <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/
summary-file.Getting_Started.html#list-tab-1622397667>.

16 U.S. Census Bureau, “Instructions on How to Read ACS 

Geography Names into Summary File Tables Using Excel,” <https://
www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2021/table-
based-SF/documentation/ACS_Table_Based_SF_Excel_Import%20
GEO%20Names_Tool.pdf>.

SAS and Other Statistical Programs

More advanced users can also use the Census Bureau’s 
example programs, available on the “ACS Summary 
File" webpage, as a starting point to access ACS data 
using SAS, Python, or other statistical software.17 
These programs can be used to access:

• The ACS 1-year data for all the geographies in a 

single state (California). 

• The ACS 5-year data for all the tracts in the  

United States.

The SAS code listed in Figure 3.1 could be used to 
output 2021 ACS 1-year data for all geographies in 
California from Table B01001, “Sex and Age.” The 
Census Bureau also has an “ACS Data Users GitHub" 
webpage where data users can share code for 
working with ACS data with different programming 
languages (R, Python, SAS, Stata, etc.).18

Webinars and Other Supporting 
Materials

The Census Bureau has organized a series of webinars 
for data users who want more information about using 
the ACS Table-Based Summary File.19 

USER NOTES

Population Thresholds

The Census Bureau publishes American Community 
Survey 1-year and 5-year estimates with population 
thresholds set for the ACS 1-year estimates to provide 
reliable data. Table 3.1 provides a brief comparison of 
the two types of estimates:

For more guidance on using ACS 1-year and 5-year 
estimates, refer to the chapter on “Understanding 
Multiyear Estimates” in Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data 
Users Need to Know.20

17 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Summary File, 

“Getting Started," <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/
summary-file.Getting_Started.html#list-tab-1622397667>.

18 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, “Data Users 

GitHub" webpage, <https://github.com/Census-ACS>.

19 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Summary File, 

“Getting Started," <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/
summary-file.Getting_Started.html#list-tab-1622397667>.

20 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 

Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, <www.
census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/library/handbooks/general.html>.

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File  13 
What All Data Users Need to Know  13

U.S. Census BureauFigure 3.1.  SAS Code Used to Output 2021 American Community Survey 1-Year Data for California 
Geographies

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, “Data Users GitHub Repository," <https://github.com/Census-ACS/acs-summary-
file/blob/master/SAS/Example01.sas>.

Table 3.1.  Understanding American Community Survey 1-Year and 5-Year Estimates

  1-Year Estimates

5-Year Estimates

Published for selected geographic areas with populations 
of 65,000 or greater.

Published for all geographic areas.

Represent the average characteristics over 1 calendar 
year.

Represent the average characteristics over a 5-year  
period of time.

Have fewer published geographic areas than the 5-year 
estimates.

Have more published areas than the 1-year estimates.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Using the American Community Survey Summary File: What Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/
programs-surveys/acs/library/handbooks/summary-file.html>. 

14  Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File 
14  What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauJam Values

A “jam value” is a hard-coded value used to explain 
the absence of data. The Table-Based Summary 
File uses numeric jam values, whereas, the previous 
sequence-based format used character values. For 
example, a jam value is represented by a value in the 
data display, such as “-666666666,” in cases where 
the estimate could not be computed because there 
was an insufficient number of sample observations. 
The sequence-based format used a dot (.) to 
express this information. Learn more about these 
special data values on the Census Bureau’s “Code 
Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy" webpage.22

Display of ACS Estimates

The estimates in the Summary File are stored using 
standard notation instead of in scientific notation. The 
estimates are stored as whole numbers. The largest 
estimate in the ACS Summary File contains 14 digits.

For More Information

For any technical questions or comments on the ACS 
Summary File, email <acso.users.support@census.
gov>. If you have questions or comments about the 
ACS, you can submit a question online at <https://
ask.census.gov/>.

Explanation of Missing Estimates and 
Data Release Filtering Rules

Data users often question why certain ACS 
estimates are not available. Missing estimates can 
be caused by data suppression through various 
methods or restrictions that are applied to ACS 
data to limit the disclosure of information about 
individual respondents and the number of published 
estimates with unacceptable statistical reliability.

Filtering rules, based on statistical reliability 
of the ACS 1-year estimates, are used to ensure 
that Detailed Tables are not released where the 
majority of estimates in the Detailed Tables have an 
unacceptable level of reliability.

Learn more about missing estimates and filtering 
rules on the Census Bureau’s “Data Suppression" 
webpage.21

Margins of Error (MOEs) and Rounding 
Rules

There are a few special rules on how certain MOEs are 
determined for ACS estimates. The accuracy of the 
estimate (decimal place) within the Detailed Tables 
determine the number of digits to where the MOE is 
rounded.

Some ACS tables and estimates do not have MOEs 
associated with them, including:

• Tables B98001, B98002, and B98003, which are 

sample counts, not estimates.

• The remaining tables in series B98 (quality 

measure tables) and B99 (allocation tables). 

• ACS estimates that are controlled to independent 

population or housing unit totals.

21 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, “Data 
Suppression," <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-
documentation/data-suppression.html>.

22

 U.S. Census Bureau, “Code Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy,"  

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/
code-lists.html>.

Using the American Community Survey Table-Based Summary File  15 
What All Data Users Need to Know  15

U.S. Census Bureau