Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Researchers Need to Know

Issued March 2020

Acknowledgments

Linda A. Jacobsen, Vice President, U.S. Programs, Population Reference 
Bureau (PRB), and Mark Mather, Associate Vice President, U.S. Programs, 
PRB, drafted this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey Office. Other PRB staff who assisted in 
drafting and reviewing the handbook include Beth Jarosz, Lillian Kilduff, 
and Paola Scommegna. Some of the material in this handbook was adapted 
from the Census Bureau’s 2009 publication, A Compass for Understanding 
and Using American Community Survey Data: What Researchers Need to 
Know, drafted by Warren A. Brown. 

American Community Survey data users who provided feedback and case 
studies for this handbook include Jean D’Amico, Brett Fried, and Sarah 
Kaufman.

Nicole Scanniello, Gretchen Gooding, and Charles Gamble, Census Bureau, 
contributed to the planning and review of this handbook series.

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of Albert E. 
Fontenot, Jr., Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs, James B. 
Treat, Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs, and Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office.

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the review and 
release of these handbooks include Grace Clemons, Barbara Downs, Justin 
Keller, Amanda Klimek, R. Chase Sawyer, Michael Starsinic, and Tyson 
Weister.

Linda Chen, Faye E. Brock, and Christine E. Geter provided publication 
management, graphics design and composition, and editorial review for 
print and electronic media under the direction of Janet Sweeney, Chief of 
the Graphic and Editorial Services Branch, Public Information Office. 

Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Researchers Need to Know

Issued March 2020

U.S. Department of Commerce 
Wilbur Ross, 
Secretary

Karen Dunn Kelley,  
Deputy Secretary 

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau,  
Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data: 
What Researchers Need to Know, 
U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC, 2020.

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Ron Jarmin, 
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer

Albert E. Fontenot Jr., 
Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs

James B. Treat, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office

Contents

1. Topics Covered in the ACS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

2. How Researchers Use ACS Data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

3. Sampling Error in the ACS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

4. Other Considerations in Working With ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

5. Case Studies Using ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

6. Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   iii 
What Researchers Need to Know    iii

U.S. Census Bureau 
This page is intentionally blank.

UNDERSTANDING AND USING AMERICAN 
COMMUNITY SURVEY DATA:  
WHAT RESEARCHERS NEED TO KNOW

The American Community Survey (ACS) is the nation’s 
premier source of detailed social, economic, housing, 
and demographic characteristics for local communities. 

This handbook describes how researchers can use ACS 
data to make comparisons, create custom tables, and 
combine ACS data with other data sources. It is aimed 
at researchers who are familiar with using data—sum-
mary tabulations and microdata records—from com-
plex sample surveys.

What Is the ACS?

The ACS is a nationwide survey designed to provide 
communities with reliable and timely social, economic, 
housing, and demographic data every year. A sepa-
rate annual survey, called the Puerto Rico Community 
Survey (PRCS), collects similar data about the popula-
tion and housing units in Puerto Rico. The U.S. Census 
Bureau uses data collected in the ACS and the PRCS 
to provide estimates on a broad range of population, 
housing unit, and household characteristics for states, 
counties, cities, school districts, congressional districts, 
census tracts, block groups, and many other geo-
graphic areas.

over a period of time rather than for a single point in 
time as in the decennial census, which is conducted 
every 10 years and provides population counts as of 
April 1 of the census year.

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been col-
lected over a 12-month period and are available for 
geographic areas with at least 65,000 people. Starting 
with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is also produc-
ing “1-year Supplemental Estimates”—simplified ver-
sions of popular ACS tables—for geographic areas with 
at least 20,000 people. The Census Bureau combines 
5 consecutive years of ACS data to produce multiyear 
estimates for geographic areas with fewer than 65,000 
residents. These 5-year estimates represent data col-
lected over a period of 60 months.1 

For more detailed information about the ACS—how 
to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, understand-
ing multiyear estimates, knowing which geographic 
areas are covered in the ACS, and how to access ACS 
data on the Census Bureau’s Web site—see the Census 
Bureau’s handbook on Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users 
Need to Know.2

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 3.5 million 
addresses, with survey information collected nearly 
every day of the year. Data are pooled across a calen-
dar year to produce estimates for that year. As a result, 
ACS estimates reflect data that have been collected 

1 The Census Bureau previously released 3-year estimates based on 
36 months of data collection. In 2015, the 3-year products were discon-
tinued. The 2011–2013 ACS 3-year estimates, released in 2014, are the 
last release of this product.

2 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American Community 

Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov 
/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks/general.html>.

1. TOPICS COVERED IN THE ACS

The primary purpose of the American Community 
Survey (ACS) is to help Congress determine funding 
and policies for a wide variety of federal programs. 
Because of this, the topics covered by the ACS are 
diverse (see Table 1.1). 

•  Economic characteristics include employment sta-

tus, health insurance, income, and earnings. 

•  Examples of housing characteristics include com-

puter and Internet use, selected monthly owner 
costs, rent, and the year the structure was built. 

•  Examples of social characteristics include disability, 
educational attainment, language spoken at home, 
and veteran status. 

•  Demographic characteristics include age, sex, race, 
Hispanic origin, and relationship to householder.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   1 
What Researchers Need to Know    1

U.S. Census Bureau  Table 1.1. Population and Housing Data Included in the American Community Survey Data Products

Social Characteristics
Ancestry
Citizenship Status
Disability Status1
Educational Attainment
Fertility
Grandparents as Caregivers
Language Spoken at Home
Marital History2
Marital Status
Migration/Residence 1 Year Ago
Period of Military Service
Place of Birth
School Enrollment
Undergraduate Field of  

Degree3

Veteran Status2
Year of Entry

Economic Characteristics
Class of Worker
Commuting (Journey to Work)
Employment Status
Food Stamps/Supplemental 

Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP)4

Health Insurance Coverage2
Income and Earnings
Industry and Occupation
Place of Work
Poverty Status
Work Status Last Year

Housing Characteristics
Computer and Internet Use5
House Heating Fuel
Kitchen Facilities
Occupancy/Vacancy Status
Occupants Per Room

Plumbing Facilities6
Rent
Rooms/Bedrooms
Selected Monthly Owner Costs
Telephone Service Available
Tenure (Owner/Renter)
Units in Structure
Value of Home
Vehicles Available
Year Householder Moved Into 

Unit

Year Structure Built

Demographics Characteristics
Age and Sex
Group Quarters Population
Hispanic or Latino Origin
Race
Relationship to Householder
Total Population

1 Questions on Disability Status were significantly revised in the 2008 survey to cause a break in series. 
2 Marital History, Veterans’ Service-Connected Disability Status and Ratings, and Health Insurance Coverage were added in the 2008 survey. 
3 Undergraduate Field of Degree was added in the 2009 survey. 
4 Food Stamp Benefit amount was removed in 2008.
5 Computer and Internet Use was added to the 2013 survey. 
6 One of the components of Plumbing Facilities, flush toilet, and Business or Medical Office on Property questions were removed in 2016.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 

TIP:  The  ACS  was  designed  to  provide  estimates  of 
the characteristics of the population, not to provide 
counts of the population in different geographic areas 
or  population  subgroups.  For  basic  counts  of  the  
U.S. population by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin, 
visit the Census Bureau’s Population and Housing Unit 
Estimates Web page.3

A good way to learn about all of the topics covered in 
the ACS is to explore the information available through 
the U.S. Census Bureau’s data dissemination platform 
on data.census.gov.4 The Data Profiles in data.census 
.gov, which include the most frequently requested 
social, economic, housing, and demographic data, are 

3 U.S. Census Bureau, Population and Housing Unit Estimates, 

<www.census.gov/popest/>.

4 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

useful for novice users who want to explore the range 
of topics that are available.5 Copies of ACS question-
naires for different years are also available on the 
Census Bureau’s Web site.6

For more detailed information about the topics in 
the ACS, see the section on “Understanding the ACS: 
The Basics” in the Census Bureau’s handbook on 
Understanding and Using American Community Survey 
Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.7

5 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Data Profiles, <https://data 

.census.gov/cedsci/all?q=dp>.  

6 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Questionnaire Archive, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/methodology/questionnaire-archive.html>. 

7 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

2   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
2   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau2. HOW RESEARCHERS USE ACS DATA

There are two main types of American Community 
Survey (ACS) data available for analysis: aggregate 
data and microdata. In aggregate (or summary) data, 
individual records are weighted and tabulated to 
create estimates for a range of geographic areas. In 
contrast, ACS microdata files include individual sur-
vey response records, with identifying information 
removed to protect the respondent’s confidentiality. 
The type of ACS data researchers use depends on the 
specific variable categories and levels of geography 
needed for their analyses.

homogeneous with respect to population characteris-
tics, economic status, and living conditions. There are 
also more than 300 ACS data tables available for block 
groups—subdivisions of census tracts—that include 
between 600 and 3,000 people each. In the ACS, 
block groups are the smallest level of geography pub-
lished. However, data users need to pay attention to 
sampling error associated with ACS estimates—espe-
cially when working with data for small geographic 
areas or population subgroups. See the section on 
“Sampling Error in the ACS” for more information. 

Using Aggregate ACS Data 

Aggregate ACS data provide a good starting point for 
data users because they are relatively easy to access 
and are available for a broad range of geographic areas 
(for example, states, metropolitan statistical areas, 
cities, or counties). Many published ACS data tables 
are also disaggregated by age, sex, race/ ethnicity, and 
other characteristics, enabling comparisons across 
different population subgroups. Every published table 
includes not only ACS estimates but also their associ-
ated margins of error (also known as levels of uncer-
tainty). Researchers can use aggregate ACS data for a 
broad range of applications, including:

•  Analyzing the relationship between economic 

status and health insurance coverage at the county 
level.

•  Comparing patterns of marital status and family 
structure across different racial/ethnic groups.

• 

Investigating state-to-state migration flows and 
how they change over time. 

•  Analyzing economic data across neighborhoods to 

identify areas of concentrated poverty.

Researchers can also use aggregate ACS data to 
access estimates for small geographic areas such as 
census tracts—small subdivisions of counties that 
typically have between 2,500 and 8,000 residents. 
Census tracts are designed to follow the boundar-
ies of neighborhoods; they encompass areas that are 

For a list of published ACS data tables, users can 
download table shells that include information about 
table universes, category line numbers, and table IDs.8 
ACS table shells are typically available 1 week before 
the data are released, allowing users to preview new 
table layouts in advance.

The U.S. Census Bureau provides access to published 
ACS tables through two main sources: data.census.gov 
and the ACS Summary File.9 

Data.census.gov

Data.census.gov is the Census Bureau’s primary tool 
for accessing population, housing, and economic data 
from the ACS, the Puerto Rico Community Survey, the 
decennial census, and many other Census Bureau data 
sets. 

Data.census.gov provides access to ACS data for 
a wide range of geographic areas including states, 
cities, counties, census tracts, and block groups.10 
Researchers can access detailed ACS tables by using 
the “Advanced Search” feature, which allows users to 
conduct keyword searches or search by using pre-
defined topics, geographies, years, surveys, or industry 
codes (see Figures 2.1 and 2.2). 

8 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  

Table Shells and Table List, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/technical-documentation/table-shells.html>. 

9 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Summary File Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/data/summary-file.html>.

10 U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   3 
What Researchers Need to Know    3

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.1. Advanced Search in Data.census.gov  

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>.

Figure 2.2. Advanced Search Filters in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>.

4   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
4   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauResearchers looking for a particular table can also use 
the search bar on the data.census.gov home page to 
search by Table ID. For example, typing “B01001” into 

the search bar generates a list of relevant Sex by Age 
tables (see Figure 2.3). Click the “Search” button to 
view a list of relevant tables.

Figure 2.3. Searching by Table ID in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   5 
What Researchers Need to Know    5

U.S. Census BureauData users can also use data.census.gov to download 
multiple tables simultaneously (see Figure 2.4). These 
tables can be downloaded in either comma-separated 
values (CSV) or PDF format. After navigating to a list 
of relevant tables: 

•  Click “Download” on the left side of the screen.

•  Use the checkboxes to select the table(s) you 

would like to download.

•  Click “Download Selected” on the left side of the 

screen.

•  Choose year(s) and type of estimates (1-Year or 

5-Year).

•  Choose File Type (CSV or PDF).

•  Click “Download” at the bottom of the screen.

For more information about data.census.gov, view the 
Census Bureau’s release notes and answers to fre-
quently asked questions about the site.11

11 U.S. Census Bureau, Data.census.gov: Census Bureau’s New Data 

Dissemination Platform Frequently Asked Questions and Release 
Notes, <https://data.census.gov/assets/releasenotes/faqs-release-
notes.pdf>.

Figure 2.4. Downloading Multiple Tables Simultaneously in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>.

6   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
6   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauACS Summary File

Researchers with programming skills and access to 
statistical software can use the ACS Summary File to 
download and analyze ACS data.12 The Summary File 
provides access to aggregate ACS data and includes 
information for geographic areas down to the block 
group level. It is useful for skilled programmers who 
want to access multiple ACS tables for large num-
bers of geographic areas. The ACS Summary File 
is designed for more advanced data users, so the 
Census Bureau recommends that users check to see 
if their tables of interest are easily available for down-
load through data.census.gov before using this data 
product. 

The ACS Summary File is a comma-delimited text 
file that contains all of the Detailed Tables for the 
ACS. The file is stored with only the data from the 
tables and without information such as the table title, 
description of the rows, or geographic identifiers. That 
information is located in other files that the user must 
merge with the data files to reproduce full tables. 
Users can merge these files through statistical pack-
ages such as R, Python, SAS, SPSS, or STATA.

The Summary File documentation provides users with 
all the information they need to access and process 
these data, including survey methods and links to 
sample SAS programs for processing the data files.13 
The ACS Summary File can be downloaded as zipped 
files from the Census Bureau’s FTP site.14 Developers 
can also access the Summary File through the Census 

12 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Summary File Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data 
/summary-file.html>.

13 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Summary File Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/technical-documentation/summary-file-documentation.html>. 

Bureau’s APIs.15 Separate ACS Summary Files are 
available for each 1-year and 5-year data release.

Using ACS Microdata 

ACS aggregate data are available for a large number 
of topics, geographic areas, and population groups, 
but not every data need can be met through pub-
lished tables. In these cases, researchers can use ACS 
microdata files to create custom estimates.

ACS microdata are individual records that include 
information about people and housing units in the 
survey with identifying information removed to protect 
each respondent’s confidentiality. Microdata provide 
the flexibility to create custom tabulations or to inves-
tigate the relationship among characteristics captured 
by the survey questionnaire. 

ACS microdata provide nearly unlimited possibilities 
for analysis, including:

•  Estimating the population living below a speci-
fied income-to-poverty ratio (for example, fam-
ily income below 185 percent of the poverty 
threshold).

•  Studying the relationship between veteran status 

and income.

•  Comparing poverty and unemployment estimates 

for women and men working in different occupa-
tional categories.

•  Tracking trends in state-to-state migration among 

baby boomers since the Great Recession.

Most researchers access ACS microdata through the 
Census Bureau’s Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) 
files. However, data can also be accessed through the 
Federal Statistical Research Data Centers (FSRDCs). 
Both sources of ACS microdata are described below.

14 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data via 
FTP, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/data-via-ftp.html>.

15 U.S. Census Bureau, Developers, Available APIs, <www.census 

.gov/data/developers/data-sets.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   7 
What Researchers Need to Know    7

U.S. Census BureauACS Public Use Microdata Sample Files

Accessible through the Census Bureau’s Web site, the 
ACS PUMS data allow data users to create their own 
tables with variables of their choosing.16 

In general, the PUMS files are more difficult to work 
with than the premade tables on data.census.gov 
because data users need to use a statistical package 
to access the data. In addition, the responsibility for 
producing estimates from PUMS and judging their 
statistical reliability is up to the user. However, once a 
data user learns how to work with PUMS, the research 
possibilities are endless.

TIP:  ACS  PUMS  data  are  not  designed  for  statistical 
analysis of small geographic areas. The Census Bureau 
restricts  the  availability  of  information  in  microdata 
files that could be used to identify a specific housing 
unit or person, including detailed geographic informa-
tion.  Thus,  the  smallest  geographic  area  available  is 
the Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA), which has a 
minimum population of 100,000.

16 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 

Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums.html>. 

PUMAs are constructed based on county and neigh-
borhood boundaries and do not cross state lines. 
Typically, counties with large populations are subdi-
vided into multiple PUMAs, while PUMAs in more rural 
areas are made up of groups of adjacent counties. 
PUMAs are especially useful for rural areas because, 
unlike counties, they meet the 65,000-population 
threshold that is needed to provide ACS 1-year esti-
mates. The value of using PUMA geography becomes 
apparent when looking at a state such as Kentucky 
(see Figures 2.5 and 2.6). The 2017 ACS 1-year esti-
mates include data for only 13 of Kentucky’s 120 
counties, but they also include data for all 34 Kentucky 
PUMAs covering the entire state. 

The ACS PUMS files include separate records for hous-
ing units and population. The housing unit records 
have unique identifiers that are repeated on each of 
the population records for people living in that hous-
ing unit. In this manner, housing unit characteristics 
can be merged with population records as needed for 
an analysis. For example, housing unit records con-
tain variables on tenure (owner/renter status), so to 
analyze data on the demographic characteristics of 
homeowners, it is necessary to link the housing unit 
and population records. 

Figure 2.5. Availability of ACS 1-Year Estimates for Kentucky: 2017 

Source: Population Reference Bureau analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, 2017 American Community Survey.

8   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
8   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.6. Public Use Microdata Areas in Kentucky

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles—Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs) (2017 boundar-
ies), <www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.html>. 

Each housing and person record is assigned a weight 
because the records in the PUMS files represent a 
sample of the population. The weight is a numeric 
variable expressing the number of housing units or 
people that an individual microdata record represents. 
The sum of the housing unit and person weights for a 
geographic area is equal to the estimate of the total 
number of housing units and people in that area. 
Since the ACS is not a simple random sample survey 
but rather a complex sample survey, the values of the 
weights vary. To generate estimates of the popula-
tion based on the sample records, it is necessary to 
use the weights assigned to each of the records cor-
rectly. The Census Bureau provides basic tabulations 

of weighted characteristics from the ACS PUMS that 
researchers can employ to verify the accuracy of their 
programming.

ACS microdata for recent years can be accessed 
through the PUMS Data Web page (see Figure 2.7).17 
Separate files are available for ACS 1-year and 5-year 
estimates, from 2005 to the most recent data release. 
ACS data are also available for earlier years (2000–
2004) through the Census Bureau’s FTP site. Files are 
available in both CSV and SAS data set formats.

17 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 

Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   9 
What Researchers Need to Know    9

U.S. Census BureauFederal Statistical Research Data Centers 

The FSRDCs are partnerships between federal sta-
tistical agencies and leading research institutions.18 
FSRDCs are secure facilities managed by the Census 
Bureau that provide secure access to a range of 
restricted-use microdata including ACS microdata. 
Unlike the ACS PUMS, which includes a representative 
subset of records from the ACS sample, the restricted 
data files contain all ACS records.

18 U.S. Census Bureau, Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, 

<www.census.gov/fsrdc>. 

FSRDC researchers have access to computing capac-
ity to handle large data sets and complex calcula-
tions. Standard statistical, econometric, and program-
ming software, including R, Stata, SAS, MATLAB, and 
Gauss, are available in a Linux environment. FSRDC 
researchers can collaborate with other research data 
center researchers across the United States through 
the secure FSRDC computing environment.

Data access via an FSRDC requires a proposal and 
approval process, including background checks of 
researchers. The approval process, while straightfor-
ward, can take several months.

Figure 2.7. ACS PUMS Data Web Page

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/data/pums.html>.

10   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
10   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauThe Census Bureau’s FSRDC Program Management 
Office considers proposals from qualified researchers 
in social science disciplines consistent with the subject 
matter of the surveys and censuses collected by the 
Census Bureau.19 Proposals can be submitted at any 
time and must:

•  Provide benefit to Census Bureau programs.

from the ACS could be combined with county-level 
death rates to investigate relationships between 
county characteristics and mortality. State, county, and 
census tract variables available through the ACS are 
likely to be defined the same way in other data sets, 
enabling researchers to produce merged data files with 
expanded lists of variables for analysis. 

•  Demonstrate scientific merit.

•  Require nonpublic data.

•  Be feasible given the data.

•  Pose no risk of disclosure.

All FSRDC researchers must obtain Census Bureau 
Special Sworn Status—passing a moderate risk back-
ground check and swearing to protect respondent 
confidentiality for life, facing significant financial and 
legal penalties under Title 13 and Title 26 of the United 
States Code for failure to do so.20

When researchers need to remove aggregated out-
put, tables, or model coefficients from the secure 
environment, the output must be reviewed to ensure 
the confidentiality of survey respondents and that the 
output is consistent with the original proposal. Once 
the results pass disclosure review, the approved files 
are provided to the researcher or team outside of the 
secure computing environment, usually via e-mail. The 
researcher(s) can then produce reports, presentations, 
and other products outside of the secure environment. 

Information about how to apply for FSRDC access is 
available on the Census Bureau’s Web site.21 

Blending ACS Data With Data From 
Other Sources

Researchers are increasingly blending ACS estimates 
with data from other sources to answer questions that 
the ACS alone cannot answer. There are two main 
methods analysts can use to combine data from dif-
ferent sources. The first method involves combining 
aggregate data based on a geographic identifier that 
is available in both data sets such as a county Federal 
Information Processing Standards (FIPS) code. For 
example, county-level social and economic estimates 

19 U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies (CES),  

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ces.html>. 

20 U.S. Census Bureau, History, Privacy & Confidentiality,  

<www.census.gov/history/www/reference/privacy_confidentiality/>. 

21 U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies (CES), Apply for 

Access, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ces/data/restricted-use-
data/apply-for-access.html>. 

The second method—available to Census Bureau staff 
and researchers with approved FSRDC projects—
involves linking individual or housing unit records from 
the ACS with administrative records based on personal 
identifiers. For example, Census Bureau staff linked 
children in the ACS with records from the Internal 
Revenue Service, Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services, Department of Health and Human Services, 
and other sources to investigate the undercount of 
young children in the decennial census.22 ACS records 
were linked to administrative data using protected 
identification keys (PIKs)—anonymous identifiers that 
can be used to link records across different data sets. 

The Census Bureau conducts a variety of research proj-
ects that combine administrative records and survey 
data to lower costs, increase efficiency, reduce respon-
dent burden, and improve data quality. Some of these 
projects generate new social and economic statistics—
such as the Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates 
Program.23 Other projects investigate ways to use 
linked data to better measure family relationships, 
evaluate program participation, and improve coverage 
of hard-to-reach populations.24

Researchers outside of the Census Bureau who are 
interested in working with linked ACS records can 
apply to do so through the FSRDCs. All FSRDC users 
must obtain Special Sworn Status and adhere to rel-
evant ethics, confidentiality, and privacy protection 
procedures. 

More information is available through the FSRDC Web 
site.25

22 Leticia Fernandez, Rachel Shattuck, and James Noon, “The Use 

of Administrative Records and the American Community Survey to 
Study the Characteristics of Undercounted Young Children in the 2010 
Census,” CARRA Working Paper Series 2018 (no. 5), 2018.

23 U.S. Census Bureau, Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates 
(SAIPE) Program, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/saipe.html>. 

24 Amy O’Hara, Rachel M. Shattuck, and Robert M. Goerge, “Linking 

Federal Surveys with Administrative Data to Improve Research on 
Families,” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science, 669 (no. 1): 63-74, 2016.

25 U.S. Census Bureau, Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, 

<www.census.gov/fsrdc>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   11 
What Researchers Need to Know    11

U.S. Census Bureau3. SAMPLING ERROR IN THE ACS

Because the American Community Survey (ACS) is 
based on a sample, rather than all housing units and 
people, ACS estimates have a degree of uncertainty 
associated with them, known as sampling error. In 
general, the larger the sample, the smaller the level of 
sampling error. To help users understand the impact 
of sampling error on data reliability, the U.S. Census 
Bureau provides a “margin of error” (MOE) for each 
published ACS estimate. The MOE, combined with 
the ACS estimate, give users a range of values within 
which the actual, “real-world” value is likely to fall. 

TIP:  Sometimes  ACS  data  users  ignore  the  issue  of 
sampling variability, which can be problematic when 
analyzing  differences  across  small  area  estimates. 
Rather than considering that the estimates are derived 
from  a  complex  sample  survey,  the  estimates  have 
sometimes been treated as values for the population. 
Data users should be careful in drawing conclusions 
about small differences between two ACS estimates 
because they may not be statistically different. 

By presenting the MOE alongside the estimates, users 
can more easily determine whether differences they 
observe over time and space are statistically signifi-
cant or within the bounds of random variation. The 
Census Bureau uses a 90 percent confidence level 
to determine the MOE in the published tabulations. 
Depending on the application, a user may wish to 

increase the confidence level to 95 percent or 99 
percent to conduct a more rigorous test of significant 
differences. 

Tests of Statistical Significance for 
Aggregate ACS Estimates

The Census Bureau has produced a Statistical Testing 
Tool to make it easier for ACS data users to conduct 
tests of statistical significance when comparing ACS 
estimates (see Figure 3.1).26 

The Statistical Testing Tool consists of an Excel 
spreadsheet that will automatically calculate statisti-
cal significance when data users are comparing two 
or more ACS estimates. Data users simply need to 
insert the ACS estimate(s) and associated MOE(s) into 
the correct columns and cells in the spreadsheet. The 
results are calculated automatically. The result “Yes” 
indicates that estimates are statistically different and 
the result “No” indicates the estimates are not statisti-
cally different.27

26 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Statistical Testing Tool, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/statistical-testing-tool.html>. 

27 This tool only conducts statistical testing on the estimates keyed 
in by the data user for comparison within the spreadsheet and it does 
not adjust the MOE when making multiple comparisons, nor incorpo-
rate a Bonferroni correction or any other method in the results of the 
statistical testing.

Figure 3.1. Statistical Testing Tool

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Statistical Testing Tool, <www.census.gov 
/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/statistical-testing-tool.html>.

12   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
12   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauCalculating Margins of Error for Custom 
(User-Derived) Estimates

In some cases, researchers will need to construct cus-
tom ACS estimates by combining data across multiple 
geographic areas or population subgroups, or it may 
be necessary to derive a new percentage, proportion, 
or ratio from published ACS data. For example, one 
way to address the issue of unreliable estimates for 
individual census tracts or block groups is to aggre-
gate geographic areas, yielding larger samples and 
estimates that are more reliable. In such cases, addi-
tional calculations are needed to produce MOEs and to 
conduct tests of statistical significance for the derived 
estimates. The section on “Calculating Measures of 
Error for Derived Estimates” in the Census Bureau’s 
handbook on Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to 
Know provides detailed instructions on how to make 
these calculations.28 Each ACS data release is also 
accompanied by “Accuracy of the Data” documenta-
tion that includes formulas for calculating MOEs (see 
Figure 3.2).29

28 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

Users should note that some of the general formulas 
for calculating MOEs for derived estimates produce 
approximations rather than exact MOEs. Advanced 
users may be interested in the Variance Replicate 
Tables, first released for the 2010–2014 ACS 5-year 
estimates in July 2016.30 These augmented ACS 
Detailed Tables include sets of 80 replicate estimates, 
which allow users to calculate MOEs for derived 
estimates using the same methods that are used to 
produce the published MOEs in the premade tables 
from the Census Bureau. These methods incorporate 
the covariance between estimates that the approxima-
tion formulas in the “Accuracy of the Data” document 
do not include.

The Variance Replicate Tables are available for a subset 
of the 5-year Detailed Tables for 11 geographic sum-
mary levels including the nation, states, counties, cen-
sus tracts, and block groups. These tables are released 
on an annual basis, shortly after the release of the 
standard 5-year data products. 

Variance Replicate Tables documentation, including 
lists of tables and summary levels, is available on the 
Census Bureau’s Web site.31 

30 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Variance Replicate Tables, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/data/variance-tables.html>. 

29 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Code 
Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/technical-documentation/code-lists.html>. 

31 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Variance 

Replicate Tables Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/technical-documentation/variance-tables.html>.

Figure 3.2. Code Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Code Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/code-lists.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   13 
What Researchers Need to Know    13

U.S. Census BureauCalculating Standard Errors for ACS 
PUMS Estimates

Researchers using the microdata files need to calculate 
their own estimates of standard error due to sampling, 
using either a generalized variance function (general-
ized standard errors) or by using the replicate weights 
(direct standard errors). The Census Bureau presents 
both approaches in their Accuracy of the Public Use 
Microdata Sample documentation.32  

The Census Bureau notes that, “Direct standard 
errors will often be more accurate than generalized 
standard errors, although they may be more incon-
venient for some users to calculate. The advantage 
of using replicate weights is that a single formula is 

used to calculate the standard error of many types of 
estimates.”33

With generalized standard errors, “design factors” are 
applied to “reflect the effects of the actual sample 
design and estimation procedures used for the ACS.”34 
There is a tendency for the formula for generalized 
standard errors to estimate higher standard errors 
than the replicate weights method. This means that by 
using the generalized formula instead of the replicate 
weights, one may be less likely to find statistically sig-
nificant differences where they actually do exist. 

32 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 

Technical Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/technical-documentation/pums/documentation.html>. 

33 U.S. Census Bureau, Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS), 

Accuracy of the Data, p. 16, 2016.

34 U.S. Census Bureau, Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS), 

Accuracy of the Data, p. 18, 2016.

14   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
14   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau4. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS IN WORKING WITH 
ACS DATA

Using ACS Data for Population and 
Housing Counts

Many researchers need data on the number of people 
and housing units in a given geographic area and how 
those numbers have changed over time. Such users 
need to understand that the American Community 
Survey (ACS) was designed to provide estimates of 
the characteristics of the population, not to provide 
counts of the population in different geographic areas 
or population subgroups. Therefore, data users are 
encouraged to rely more upon noncount statistics, 
such as percent distributions or averages, when using 
ACS estimates.

The U.S. Census Bureau's Population Estimates 
Program produces and disseminates the official esti-
mates of the population for the nation, states, coun-
ties, cities, and towns, and estimates of housing units 
for states and counties.35 For 2010 and other decennial 
census years, the decennial census provides the official 
counts of population and housing units.36

The Census Bureau uses a weighting method to ensure 
that ACS estimates are consistent with official popula-
tion estimates at the county level by age, sex, race, and 
Hispanic origin—as well as estimates of total housing 
units. ACS single-year estimates are controlled to popu-
lation and total housing unit estimates as of July 1 of the 
survey year, while ACS 5-year estimates are controlled 
to the average of the July 1 population and housing unit 
estimates over the 5-year period.

Starting with the 2009 survey, ACS estimates of the 
total population of incorporated places (self-governing 
cities, towns, or villages) and minor civil divisions 
(county subdivisions, in 20 states where they serve as 
functioning governmental units) are also adjusted so 
they are consistent with official population estimates. 
However, ACS data for other statistical areas, such as 
Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs) or census tracts, 
have no control totals, which may lead to larger mar-
gins of error for population and housing unit estimates 
than in areas of similar size with control totals. In such 
cases, data users are again encouraged to rely more 
on noncount statistics such as percent distributions or 
averages.

Comparing Geographic Areas

One of the main benefits of the ACS is the ability to make 
comparisons—over time, across different geographic 
areas, and across different population subgroups.

When making comparisons with ACS data, note that 
differences in survey design, questionnaire content and 
design, sample size, or geography may affect compa-
rability of estimates. Researchers interested in making 
comparisons also need to pay attention to sampling 
error because differences between estimates may or 
may not be statistically significant. See the section on 
“Sampling Error in the ACS” for more information. 

Data users also need to decide how to compare 
geographic areas with different population sizes. ACS 
estimates for areas with fewer than 20,000 people are 
provided only in the form of 5-year estimates. However, 
for larger areas with at least 65,000 people (or 
20,000 people in the case of the 1-year Supplemental 
Estimates) both 1-year and 5-year data are available, so 
data users need to choose which estimates to use.37

TIP: When comparing ACS estimates across differ-
ent geographic areas or population subgroups, data 
users should avoid comparing ACS single-year esti-
mates with ACS multiyear estimates. That is, 1-year 
estimates should only be compared with other 1-year 
estimates, and 5-year estimates should only be com-
pared with other 5-year estimates. 

Suppose a researcher wanted to compare veterans’ 
characteristics in Athens, Texas—a small city southeast 
of Dallas—with veterans in Houston. Although the ACS 
publishes annual estimates on veterans for Houston, 
only 5-year estimates are available for Athens. Thus, 
data users should compare ACS 5-year estimates for 
Athens with ACS 5-year estimates for Houston, even 
though more recent, single-year estimates are available 
for Houston. 

Another option for presenting ACS data for less 
populated areas is to show single-year estimates for 
large counties in Texas and then combine the remain-
ing counties into a state “residual” by subtracting 
the available single-year data from the state total. 
Alternatively, data users could present ACS estimates 
for PUMAs, since they meet the 65,000-population 

35 U.S. Census Bureau, Population and Housing Unit Estimates, 

<www.census.gov/popest/>. 

36 See, for example, the U.S. Census Bureau, “Census of Population 

37 One-year Supplemental Estimates are simplified versions of 

and Housing, CPH-2,” Population and Housing Unit Counts report 
series, <www.census.gov/prod/www/decennial.html>.

popular ACS tables available for geographic areas with at least 20,000 
people. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   15 
What Researchers Need to Know    15

U.S. Census Bureauthreshold required for single-year estimates and are 
often used as a substitute for county-level data.38 

The Census Bureau provides additional guidance on 
Comparing ACS Data on their Web site.39 

characteristics accompanying expanded drilling in the 
Bakken oil fields in North Dakota—where there was 
a large influx of male workers—because the affected 
counties only received 5-year, rather than 1-year, ACS 
estimates.

Comparing ACS Data Over Time

TIP: When using 5-year estimates, data users are 
encouraged to compare ACS data over time based 
on nonoverlapping estimates. For example, it would 
be appropriate for a data user to compare the 2007–
2011 ACS 5-year estimates to the 2012–2016 ACS 
5-year estimates. However, it would not be appro-
priate for a data user to compare the 2011–2015 
ACS 5-year estimates to the 2012–2016 ACS 5-year 
estimates.

Comparisons using ACS 1-year data are generally 
straightforward, but using multiyear estimates to 
look at trends for small populations can be challeng-
ing because they rely on pooled data for 5 years. For 
example, comparisons of 5-year estimates from 2011 
to 2015 and 2012 to 2016 are unlikely to show much 
difference because 4 of the years overlap; both sets of 
estimates include the same data collected from 2012 
through 2015.40 The Census Bureau suggests compar-
ing 5-year estimates that do not overlap—for example, 
comparing 2007–2011 ACS 5-year estimates with 
2012–2016 ACS 5-year estimates. 

There is a broader issue of how to use multiyear char-
acterizations of an area to measure change over time. 
As the ACS program has moved forward, an entire 
series of multiyear estimates for various time intervals 
has become available. Data users now have access 
to nonoverlapping ACS 5-year estimates that have 
increased the value and utility of the data for monitor-
ing trends in local communities. However, it is more 
challenging to capture rapid change in areas where 
only ACS 5-year estimates are available. For exam-
ple, it was very difficult for local officials and plan-
ners to accurately assess changes in socioeconomic 

38 Although Public Use Microdata Areas typically follow county 

boundaries, this is not always the case, particularly in some New 
England states.

39 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Comparing ACS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/comparing-acs-data.html>.

40 While the interpretation of this difference is difficult, these 
comparisons can be made with caution. Users who are interested in 
comparing overlapping multiyear period estimates should refer to the 
section “Understanding Error and Determining Statistical Significance” 
in the Census Bureau’s handbook Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, available 
at <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

TIP: Changes to ACS questions over time may also 
make it difficult to measure trends. For example, 
the Census Bureau made substantial changes to the 
2008 ACS questions on labor force participation and 
the number of weeks worked. As a result, the Census 
Bureau recommends using caution when compar-
ing 2008 and later labor force data with 2007 and 
earlier estimates. 

The Census Bureau provides “New and Notable” 
information with each new ACS data release, including 
information about changes to tables that may affect 
users’ ability to measure trends over time.41 Data users 
should also consider changes in geographic boundar-
ies, population controls, and inflation when analyzing 
trends with ACS data. 

Geographic Boundaries

ACS data generally reflect the geographic boundaries 
as of the year the data are collected. While geographic 
boundary changes are somewhat infrequent, they do 
occur, and those changes can affect a data user’s abil-
ity to make comparisons over time. For example, con-
gressional districts are redrawn every 10 years imme-
diately following the decennial census. Congressional 
district data from the 2012 ACS reflect the new bound-
aries that were drawn after the 2010 Census, while ACS 
data for earlier years reflect the 2000 Census bound-
aries. Given the major changes to district boundar-
ies after each census, a comparison of congressional 
district data between 2011 and 2012 is not feasible.

ACS data are also regularly updated to reflect local 
changes in geographic boundaries. For example, the 
city of Jurupa Valley, California, incorporated in July 
2011. Data for this city was first published in 2012 and 
has been updated each subsequent year, but data 
are not available for Jurupa Valley for 2011 and earlier 
years. The Census Bureau does not revise ACS data for 
previous years to reflect changes in geographic bound-
aries. For more information, visit the Census Bureau’s 
Web page on Geography & ACS.42

41 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data 

Releases, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news 
/data-releases.html>. 

42 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 

Geography & ACS, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/geography-acs.html>.

16   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
16   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauPopulation Controls

The ACS uses a weighting methodology to ensure 
that ACS estimates are consistent with official Census 
Bureau population estimates by age, sex, race, and 
Hispanic origin. With each annual release of population 
estimates, the Population Estimates Program revises 
and updates the entire time series of estimates from 
the previous decennial census to the current year. 
However, ACS estimates for prior years are not revised 
or reweighted based on updated population estimates. 

The change in the population estimates from 2009 to 
2010 was particularly significant. The 2010 ACS 1-year 
data and 2006–2010 ACS 5-year data were controlled 
to population estimates that reflected the results of the 
2010 Census. However, the 1-year and 5-year data for 
2009 and earlier years used population estimates that 
were based on the 2000 Census. 

TIP: Because the 2009 ACS and 2010 ACS 1-year 
estimates use controls that are based on differ-
ent decennial census base years, data users need 
to use caution when making comparisons across 
these years. Specifically, estimates of the number 
of people in a given geographic area or population 
subgroup are not strictly comparable between these 
2 years. However, rates and percentages—as well as 
monetary data, such as median income values—are 
generally comparable between the two periods.

Monetary Data

Data users also need to use caution in looking at 
trends involving income or other measures that are 
adjusted for inflation such as rental costs, home values, 
and energy costs. 

For example, to compare published monetary data for 
the most recent year with data from the 2010 ACS, 
data users need to adjust the 2010 data for inflation 
based on a national-level consumer price index. 

ACS multiyear estimates with dollar values are 
adjusted for inflation to the final year of the period. 
For example, the 2011–2015 ACS 5-year estimates are 
tabulated using dollars adjusted to 2015. 

Note that inflation adjustment does not account for 
differences in costs of living across different geo-
graphic areas. For more information on the adjustment 
of ACS single-year and multiyear estimates for infla-
tion, see the section on “Using Dollar-Denominated 
Data” in Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to 
Know.43 

43 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

Comparisons With Data From the  
2000 Census and the 2010 Census

The ACS was modeled after the long form of the 
decennial census, and data users interested in long-
term trends can, in many cases, make valid com-
parisons between ACS and the 2000 Census (and 
earlier decennial census) estimates. Census Bureau 
subject-matter specialists have reviewed the factors 
that could affect differences between ACS and the 
2000 Census estimates, and they have determined 
that ACS estimates are similar to those obtained from 
past decennial census sample data for most areas and 
characteristics. 

However, differences in residence rules, universes (base 
reference totals against which all other characteristics 
are compared), and reference periods between the 
two surveys should be considered when making these 
comparisons. For example, the ACS data are collected 
throughout the calendar year, while the 2000 Census 
long form sampled the population as of April 1, 2000. 
Given the differences in the reference period, the two 
surveys may yield very different estimates for com-
munities with large seasonal populations or those 
undergoing rapid change. The section on “Differences 
Between the ACS and the Decennial Census” in 
the handbook Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need 
to Know provides more information about these 
differences.44

The 2010 Census was a short-form only census, so 
it does not include all the detailed social, economic, 
and housing data available from previous censuses. 
However, data users can make valid comparisons 
between ACS estimates and basic characteristics from 
the 2010 Census including age, sex, race, Hispanic 
origin, household relationship, and housing tenure 
(homeowner or renter status). For basic counts of 
the U.S. population by age, sex, race, and Hispanic 
origin between censuses, data users are encouraged 
to use the Census Bureau’s official population esti-
mates available on the Census Bureau’s Population and 
Housing Unit Estimates Web site.45 

For detailed guidance on comparing ACS and 2000 
Census data, visit the Census Bureau’s Web page on 
Comparing ACS Data.46 

44 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

45 U.S. Census Bureau, Population and Housing Unit Estimates, 

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest.html>.

46 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Comparing ACS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/comparing-acs-data.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   17 
What Researchers Need to Know    17

U.S. Census Bureau5. CASE STUDIES USING ACS DATA

Case Study #1: Mobility and Economic Opportunity in New York City Neighborhoods

Skill Level: Intermediate/Advanced 
Subject: Commuting/transportation challenges  
Type of Analysis: Analysis of job opportunities, household income, and population size across New York City 
neighborhoods 
Tools Used: Application Programming Interface (API), spreadsheet 
Author: Sarah Kaufman, Assistant Director for Technology Programming at the New York University (NYU) Rudin 
Center for Transportation

The ability of a public transportation network to physically link residents to jobs has become a central point of 
concern for urban policy in an era of uneven unemployment and rapidly changing job markets. The economy of 
New York City is unique in North America due to the high proportion of residents using public transportation. In 
2016, more than half of the population in New York City (56.6 percent) used some kind of public transportation 
to get to work, and an individual’s ability to access a job is largely a function of how well their neighborhood is 
served by the public transportation system. 

In a recent report, the Rudin Center for Transportation Policy and Management at NYU's Robert F. Wagner 
School of Public Service explored some of the key transportation challenges facing New York City residents, 
based on data from the American Community Survey (ACS) and other sources.47 An accompanying interactive 
map enables users to explore the data for their neighborhoods.48

Results showed disparities in transportation access. Furthermore, low levels of transit access were associated 
with lower income and employment among residents, while high levels of transit access were associated with 
higher income and employment.

Methods

Rudin Center staff analyzed and ranked 177 New York City neighborhoods based on access to job opportuni-
ties, household income, and population size. The rankings reflect the number of jobs that can be reached within 
1 hour by public transportation. (A commute time of 1 hour or less was selected based on prior research showing 
that commuters prefer to travel less than 1 hour.) 

Demographic data are from the U.S. Census Bureau’s ACS 5-year estimates for ZIP Code Tabulation Areas 
(ZCTAs). ZCTAs are aggregations of census blocks that form “generalized areal representations of United States 
Postal Service (USPS) ZIP code service areas.”49

New York City fully contains 186 ZCTAs as defined in the 2010 Census. In this work, ZCTAs are only included as 
a unit of observation if they contain populations of at least 2,500 according to the 2008–2012 ACS. It should 
be noted that the estimates included in the report and interactive maps do not account for margins of error. 
However, the population threshold helps to ensure accurate demographic data exist within the ZIP code (unlike 
park areas), and to avoid small areas that would not be representative of a larger neighborhood. Of the 186 ZIP 
codes, 177 have a population of at least 2,500.50 

ACS estimates for ZCTAs were accessed through the Census Data API.51 

To access 2008–2012 ACS 5-year employment and unemployment data from the Census Data API, enter the fol-
lowing query in your Web browser: <https://api.census.gov/data/2012/acs/acs5?get=group(B23025)&for=ZIP 
%20code%20tabulation%20area:*> as described in the steps below (see Figure 5.1).

1.  Start your query with the host name: “https://api.census.gov/data.”

47 The Rudin Center for Transportation Policy and Management, Mobility, Economic Opportunity and New York City Neighborhoods, 

November 2015, <https://wagner.nyu.edu/impact/research/publications/mobility-economic-opportunity-and-new-york-city-neighborhoods>. 

48 Datapolitan, NYC Neighborhoods: Mobility & Economic Opportunity, <www.datapolitan.com/job_access/>. 
49 U.S. Census Bureau, ZIP Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTAs), <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/guidance/geo-areas/zctas.html>. 
50 In cases where ZCTA-level data were unavailable, census tract estimates were “cross-walked” to conform to ZCTA boundaries using an allo-

cation algorithm provided by the Missouri Census Data Center.

51 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Data API User Guide, <www.census.gov/data/developers/guidance/api-user-guide.html>.

18   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
18   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau2.  Add the data year (2012) to the URL: “https://api.census.gov/data/2012.”

3.  Add the data set name acronym for the ACS 5-Year Detailed Tables, and follow this base URL with a question 

mark: “https://api.census.gov/data/2012/acs/acs5?.”

4.  Add variables starting with a get clause, “get=”: “https://api.census.gov/data/2012/acs/acs5?get=.”

5.  Use the group feature to return all data items for Table B23025 (which contains labor force, employment, 

and unemployment details): “https://api.census.gov/data/2012/acs/acs5?get=group(B23025).”

6.  Add geography using a predicate clause starting with an ampersand (&) to separate it from your “get” clause 

and then a “for=” to identify geographic areas of interest:  
“https://api.census.gov/data/2012/acs/acs5?get=group(B23025)&for=.”

7. 

Identify the geographic area(s) that you need (ZCTAs) by reviewing the list of geographies available for the 
2008–2012 ACS 5-year Detailed Tables.52

8.  Because you need data for many ZIP codes, add a wildcard (*) to get all ZCTA values: 

“https://api.census.gov/data/2012/acs/acs5?get=group(B23025)&for=ZIP%20code%20tabulation%20area:*.”

After downloading the comma-separated file, we opened it in a spreadsheet to analyze the data.

Figure 5.1. ZIP Code Tabulation Area Query for Employment and Unemployment    
               Data From Table B23025: 2008–2012

Note: Data are shown for the first five rows. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://api.census.gov/data/2012/acs/acs5?get=group(B23025)&for 
=ZIP%20code%20tabulation%20area:*>.

To calculate the unemployment rate, we divided a ZCTA’s unemployed population (B23025_005E) by its civilian 
labor force (B23025_003E). Using the example of Chelsea (North), ZCTA 10001, we calculated an unemployment 
rate of 9 percent (see Figure 5.2).

52 U.S. Census Bureau, <https://api.census.gov/data/2012/acs/acs5/geography.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   19 
What Researchers Need to Know    19

U.S. Census BureauWe repeated a similar process for all other ACS variables of interest. ACS data were then combined with infor-
mation from the Google Maps Routing API and the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics 
(LEHD) Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LODES) data set.

Figure 5.2. Unemployment Rate for Chelsea (North) ZCTA 10001: 2008–2012

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey.

The Google Maps Routing API was used to estimate travel times between origins and destinations. The API can 
be queried with origin and destination pairs to output the estimated travel time according to Google’s algorithm. 
This project used this service to generate a data set containing all ZIP code-level travel times in the region, which 
originated in New York City and terminated anywhere in the New York, New Jersey, or Connecticut region.

The LEHD data set provides employment counts by subcategories at the census block level. LODES provides a 
level of detail regarding employment that is not available from the ACS. LODES data were cross-walked from 
census blocks to ZIP codes using a Missouri Census Data Center tool.53 Because census blocks are even smaller 
than the census tracts used for demographic data, there is essentially no loss of precision due to cross-walking 
to the much larger ZIP-code level. This report uses the LODES data for 2013, which were the most current at the 
time of publication.

Data points from the three aforementioned sources were merged together to create a single observation for 
each ZIP code in New York City. LODES data were downloaded for all of New York State, New Jersey, and 
Connecticut; this allowed job counts to be assigned to ZIP codes for the entire region. Google routing data were 
collected for journeys originating within a ZIP code in New York City, but ending in any ZIP code within the larger 
region. ACS data were collected for New York City only.

More detailed information about these methods is available in the report.

Results

The data show that mass transit access is associated with job opportunities and household income levels in most 
New York City neighborhoods.

The rankings, along with the summary chart below, show the swoosh-shaped relationship between transit and 
income in New York City: Neighborhoods with some, but insufficient transit access—those ranked in the middle 
third—faced higher rates of unemployment than those in the top or bottom third (see Figure 5.3). 

Our partners at Datapolitan then turned the resulting data, for all ZIP codes, into an online, interactive applica-
tion (see Figures 5.4 and 5.5).

53 Missouri Census Data Center, Geocorr 2014: Geographic Correspondence Engine, <http://mcdc.missouri.edu/applications/geocorr2014 

.html>.   

20   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
20   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 5.3. New York Ranked Neighborhoods: Income, Unemployment, and  
                Commuting: 2008–2012

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey.

Figure 5.4. Results for Chelsea (North) ZCTA 10001

Source: Datapolitan, NYC Neighborhoods: Mobility & Economic Opportunity, <www.datapolitan 
.com/job_access/>. 

Figure 5.5. Results for Chelsea (North), ZCTA 10001

Source: Datapolitan, NYC Neighborhoods: Mobility & Economic Opportunity, <www.datapolitan.com 
/job_access/>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   21 
What Researchers Need to Know    21

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #2: State Level Trends in Children’s Health Insurance Coverage 

Skill Level: Intermediate/Advanced 
Subject: State-level trends in children’s health insurance coverage 
Type of Analysis: Analysis of changes in children’s health insurance coverage over time  
Tools Used: American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) files, statistical software, spread-
sheet  
Author: Brett Fried, Senior Research Fellow, State Health Access Data Assistance Center (SHADAC)

The State Health Access Data Assistance Center (SHADAC) is a multidisciplinary health policy research center 
affiliated with the University of Minnesota that focuses on state health policy. “State-Level Trends in Children’s 
Health Insurance Coverage” (the “Kids’ Report”) is one of many reports that SHADAC produces at the state level 
to show trends over time in insurance coverage, access, cost, utilization, and outcomes, as well as in equity and 
economic measures.54 

Approach

To generate reports from the American Community Survey (ACS) PUMS files, SHADAC started by creating an 
analytical data set using SAS. The microdata allowed us to create custom variables such as a health insurance 
unit (HIU) in this data set. The HIU defines “family” based on who is likely considered part of a “family unit” in 
determining eligibility for either private or public coverage. HIU is a narrower definition of family, compared with 
the Census Bureau’s general definition of family that groups all related members of a household into a family.55 
We also created Affordable Care Act (ACA)-relevant poverty-level categories—0 to 138 percent of the Federal 
Poverty Guideline (FPG); 139 to 400 percent FPG; and 401 percent FPG or more. To measure family poverty, 
income is totaled for all individuals in the health insurance unit. The income is divided by the FPG produced by 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to calculate the income as a percentage of FPG. (In 2016, 
the federal poverty guideline for a family of four was $24,300.) We used SAS to create the analytic data set that 
included the custom HIU and poverty-level categories and then transferred the data set using StatTransfer soft-
ware into a STATA data set to produce relevant estimates.

After transferring the data set into STATA, we created variables for other subjects of interest such as race/eth-
nicity and educational attainment. Then we produced estimates for all the custom HIU and income categories, 
broken down by coverage type, using STATA code. For example, we produced estimates of children by private 
coverage, public coverage, and uninsurance by three income categories from 2011 to 2016. If someone had more 
than one source of coverage, we considered private coverage as primary over public sources. 

Next, we tested for statistically significant percentage-point differences in the estimates between 2013 (generally, 
pre-ACA implementation) and 2016 (post-ACA implementation). Percentage-point differences between years are 
reported in the tables. We produced three products from these estimates. The first product is a summary report 
where we use maps, tables, and figures to highlight the main findings. Estimates with coefficients of variation 
(standard error/estimate) greater than 30 percent are not included in the report (see Figure 5.6).

54 SHADAC, “State-Level Trends in Children's Health Insurance Coverage,” 2013–2016, <www.shadac.org/KidsReport2016>.
55 SHADAC has a more detailed description of how we create the HIU in SHADAC I (Defining Family for Studies of Health Insurance Coverage), 

<www.shadac.org/publications/defining-family-studies-health-insurance-coverage>.

22   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
22   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 5.6. Trends in Child Health Insurance: 2011–2016

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Public Use Microdata 
Samples, 2011 to 2016.

The second product is a set of 50-state tables. These detailed tables allow for cross-year comparisons between 
states from 2013 to 2016. Statistically significant differences between years at a 95 percent confidence level are 
indicated with an asterisk (see Figure 5.7).

Figure 5.7. Trends in Health Insurance Coverage for Children by State: 2013–2016

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Public Use Microdata 
Samples, 2013 and 2016.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   23 
What Researchers Need to Know    23

U.S. Census BureauThe third product is a set of individual state profiles. These two-page profiles provide “at-a-glance” graphic sum-
maries of 5-year trends in children’s health insurance coverage for each state and the United States, including 
statistical comparisons (see Figure 5.8).

Figure 5.8. Profile of Child Health Insurance in Minnesota

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 
2011-2016.

24   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
24   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFindings

In the Kids’ Report released in June 2018, we found that since the coverage provisions of the ACA took effect, 
children in the United States have seen significant declines in uninsurance, with the number of uninsured children 
dropping by 2.2 million, or 2.9 percentage points, between 2013 and 2016. These coverage gains were sustained 
despite an uncertain policy climate around the ACA. Drops in uninsurance were seen across demographic cat-
egories, and some of the largest coverage gains were made by groups of children who historically have had the 
highest rates of uninsurance: low-income, Hispanic, and non-White children, and children in households with low 
educational attainment. Despite coverage gains, coverage rates for these groups are still significantly below those 
of high-income children and White children, and coverage varies across states.

Lessons Learned

One of the lessons learned from this and other similar projects that include data for all states is that category 
definitions matter. For example, if the categories are too narrow, then estimates in many states will be suppressed 
(for example, if “American Indian and Alaska Native” is one of categories that is cross tabulated with children’s 
coverage, then most state estimates will be suppressed due to small sample size and large margins of error 
around the estimates). 

Impact

The SHADAC Kids’ Report is updated annually as new data become available. The report is used as a resource 
by state and federal analysts, academic researchers, the media, nonprofits, advocacy groups, foundations, and 
the public, as well as by internal SHADAC coworkers. In the first 3 weeks after its release, the report was viewed 
nearly 250 times.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   25 
What Researchers Need to Know    25

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #3: Children Living in Areas of Concentrated Poverty

Skill Level: Advanced 
Subject: Neighborhood poverty  
Type of Analysis: Estimating the percentage of children who live in neighborhoods of concentrated poverty 
Tools Used: American Community Survey (ACS) Summary File, statistical software (SAS), spreadsheet 
Author: Jean D’Amico, Senior Research Associate, Population Reference Bureau (PRB)

Researchers largely agree that the residential clustering of poverty adversely affects the life chances of residents 
living in those high-poverty areas. There is also general consensus in the literature that the deleterious effects 
of residential concentrated poverty can occur once poverty rates reach a level of 20 to 40 percent. For this 
case study, we analyzed the percentage of children under the age of 18 living in areas of concentrated poverty—
defined as census tracts with overall poverty rates of 30 percent or more. 

Because we wanted to work with census-tract level data, we needed to use ACS 5-year data. We used the 
ACS Summary File because we needed data for a large number of geographic areas (every census tract in the 
nation).

Step 1. Extract the Data

There are several ways to access census tract data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Web site, including data.census.gov. 
However, for this example, we use a SAS macro program to extract data from the ACS Summary File. This program is 
intended for advanced users who need to extract data for many geographies at once. 

Our first step is to download the SAS program that we need to merge the ACS estimate and margin of error files 
with the geography files.56 The “5-Year Macros” program is designed to read in the ACS 5-year Summary File. 
The program includes detailed comments that guide users through each procedure and macro (see Figure 5.9).

Figure 5.9. Downloadable SAS Program to Extract ACS Summary File Data

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Summary File Documentation, 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/summary-file-documentation 
.2016.html>.

56 SAS programs for 2016 data can be found at <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/summary-file 

-documentation.2016.html> under the heading “SAS Programs.”

26   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
26   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauStep 2. Identify the Tables of Interest

Using the Sequence Number/Table Number Lookup file, we identify the tables needed to calculate our mea-
sure and note three key pieces of information for each: the table number, the sequence number, and the line 
numbers.57

To determine the poverty rate of each tract, we need:

1.  The table number (B17001).

2.  The sequence number (48).

3.  The line numbers needed for calculations (2 and 31) (see Figure 5.10). 

Figure 5.10. Table, Sequence, and Line Numbers for Table B17001: Poverty Status  
                  in the Past 12 Months by Sex by Age

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Sequence Number/Table Number Lookup file, 2016, <www.census.gov 
/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/summary-file-documentation.2016.html>.

To determine the total population of children living in each tract, we need:

1.  The table number (B09001).

2.  The sequence number (34).

3.  The line number needed for calculations (1) (see Figure 5.11).

Figure 5.11. Table, Sequence, and Line Numbers for Table B09001: Population  
                Under 18 Years by Age

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Sequence Number/Table Number Lookup, 2016, <www.census.gov 
/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/summary-file-documentation.2016.html>.

57 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Summary File Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 

/technical-documentation/summary-file-documentation.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   27 
What Researchers Need to Know    27

U.S. Census BureauStep 3. Download the Data

Now that we know which files we need, we can download them from the Census Bureau’s File Transfer Protocol 
server.58 

Since we are interested in collecting tract-level data for the entire United States, and we are using SAS statistical 
software, we access the complete set of ACS 5-year Summary Files from the “5_year_entire_sf/” directory, which 
includes data for all census tracts in all states (see Figure 5.12).59

Figure 5.12. Summary File Download: 2016

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2016 
/data>.

Within the “5_year_entire_sf” directory, there are several files. We need to download files with 2016 tract-level 
ACS estimates and their associated margins of error. We also need the 2016 ACS geography files. We down-
load and unzip the geography files (2016_ACS_Geography_Files.zip) and the estimate and margin of error files 
(Tracts_Block_Groups_Only.tar.gz) (see Figure 5.13).  

Figure 5.13. Summary File Download: 2016

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/summary_file/2016 
/data/5_year_entire_sf/>. 

58 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data via FTP, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/data-via-ftp.html>.
59 Note: If we were interested in a specific state, we could save download time and disk space by downloading only that state. See the direc-

tory link for 5_year_by_state in Figure 5.12.

28   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
28   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauStep 4. Access and Analyze the Data

Now that we have the files we need, we can access the data using the 5-year macro program described in Step 1. 
The 5-Year Macro SAS program needs to be edited to reflect the file paths of our unzipped files. The macro pro-
gram accesses the geography, estimate, and margin of error data and creates a single table for all geographies 
from the ACS Summary File. The final data set we create for our analysis includes all tracts (as separate rows) 
and the estimate and margin of error variables of interest for computing our measure (see Figure 5.14).

Figure 5.14. Selected Records and Variables From Summary File Table B17001 by  
                 Census Tract: 2016

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Summary File.

With the final data set complete, we begin constructing our measure by computing the poverty rate for each 
tract. Recall that Table B17001, line 2 (variable B17001e2) is the sum of those living below poverty. Table B17001, 
line 31 (variable B17001e31) is the sum of those living at or above poverty (see Figure 5.14, above). Therefore, the 
percentage of residents in a census tract who are living below poverty is calculated as:  
Percentage in Poverty = B17001e2 / (B17001e2 + B17001e31) (see Figure 5.15).

SAS code: 
PCTPOVERTY = B17001e2 / (B17001e2 + B17001e31) *100;

Figure 5.15. Calculating the Percentage in Poverty by Census Tract: 2016

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 
Summary File.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   29 
What Researchers Need to Know    29

U.S. Census BureauNext, we create a variable that will identify the number of children who live in tracts with poverty rates at or 
above 30 percent. We assign a value of zero to a variable when the poverty rate in the tract is below 30 percent. 
If the poverty rate in the tract is 30 percent or greater, the variable is equal to the child population of that tract. 
Recall that table B09001 line 1 (B09001e1) is the total population under 18 years (see Figure 5.16). The number of 
children who live in high-poverty tracts is computed as follows: 

SAS code: 
NUMCHILD = 0; 
If PCTPOVERTY > = 30 then NUMCHILD = B09001e1;

Figure 5.16. Calculating the Number of Children in High-Poverty Census Tracts: 
                 2016

Note: High-poverty is defined as a poverty rate at or above 30 percent. 
Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 
Summary File.

The tract-level totals can be summed to larger levels of geography such as states or the entire United States. 
When we sum our variables by state, we create a new data set where the observations are the United States, the 
50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Our NUMCHILD variable reflects the number of children in 
the state (or the nation) who live in high-poverty tracts. The last step is to calculate the percentage of children 
living in high-poverty tracts for each of these areas.

To calculate the percentage of children in each state and the nation living in high-poverty tracts, we divide the 
number of children who live in high-poverty tracts (NUMCHILD) by the total population of children (B09001e1) 
(see Table 5.1).

SAS code: 
PCTCHILD = NUMCHILD / B09001e1*100;

According to the 2012–2016 ACS 5-year estimates, a total of 9.4 million children under 18 years of age lived in a 
high-poverty neighborhood, representing 13 percent of all children in the United States.

30   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
30   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauTable 5.1. Number and Percentage of Children Living in High-Poverty Census 
Tracts by State: 2012–2016

Note: High-poverty is defined as a poverty rate at or above 30 percent. The U.S. totals exclude data 
for Puerto Rico. 
Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Summary 
File.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   31 
What Researchers Need to Know    31

U.S. Census Bureau6. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

U.S. Census Bureau, What is the ACS? 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/about.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: 
What All Data Users Need to Know  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks/general.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Releases 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data-releases.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, Geography and ACS 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography-acs.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Tables and Tools 
<www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and-tools/>

U.S. Census Bureau, Data.census.gov: Census Bureau’s New Data Dissemination Platform Frequently Asked 
Questions and Release Notes  
<https://data.census.gov/assets/releasenotes/faqs-release-notes.pdf>

U.S. Census Bureau, Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) Documentation 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/pums.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Design and Methodology Report 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology/design-and-methodology.html>

32   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
32   What Researchers Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau