Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Congress Needs to Know

Issued June 2020

Acknowledgments

Linda A. Jacobsen, Vice President, U.S. Programs, Population Reference 
Bureau (PRB), Mark Mather, Associate Vice President, U.S. Programs, PRB, 
and Kelvin Pollard, Senior Demographer, U.S. Programs, PRB, drafted 
this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau’s American 
Community Survey Office. Other PRB staff who assisted in drafting and 
reviewing the handbook include Beth Jarosz, Lillian Kilduff, and Paola 
Scommegna. 

Some of the material in this handbook was adapted from the Census 
Bureau’s 2008 publication, A Compass for Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What Congress Needs to Know, drafted 
by Terri Ann Lowenthal and Mary Jo Hoeksema.

Nicole Scanniello, Gretchen Gooding, and Amanda Klimek, Census Bureau, 
contributed to the planning and review of this handbook.  

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of   
Albert E. Fontenot, Jr., Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs, 
James B. Treat, Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs, and 
Donna M. Daily, Chief, American Community Survey Office.

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the review 
and release of these handbooks include Alissa Bonner, Mark Dorsey, Sirius 
Fuller, R. Chase Sawyer, and Tyson Weister.

Faye Brock, Linda Chen, Christine Geter, and Amanda Perry provided 
publication management, graphic design and composition, and editorial 
review for print and electronic media under the direction of Janet Sweeney, 
Chief of the Graphic and Editorial Services Branch, Public Information Office.

Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Congress Needs to Know

Issued June 2020

U.S. Department of Commerce 
Wilbur Ross, 
Secretary

Karen Dunn Kelley,  
Deputy Secretary 

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau,  
Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data: 
What Congress Needs to Know, 
U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC, 2020.

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Ron Jarmin, 
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer

Albert E. Fontenot, Jr., 
Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs

James B. Treat, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office

Contents

1. How Congress Uses ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

2. ACS Data Products for Congressional Uses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5

3. Case Studies Using ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8

4. Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   iii 
What Congress Needs to Know   iii

U.S. Census Bureau 
This page is intentionally blank.

UNDERSTANDING AND USING AMERICAN 
COMMUNITY SURVEY DATA: WHAT CONGRESS 
NEEDS TO KNOW

Congress needs accurate, up-to-date information to 
make good decisions—from allocating federal program 
funds to developing program eligibility requirements, 
monitoring compliance with federal laws, and evaluat-
ing community needs. Congressional staff also need 
timely data to support communication efforts, respond 
to constituent inquiries, draft legislation, analyze legis-
lative proposals, and conduct legislative research. 

The U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey 
(ACS) provides members of Congress the data they 
need for decision-making. This guide provides a brief 
overview of how members of Congress use ACS data 
for important legislative purposes.

What Is the American Community 
Survey?

The ACS is a nationwide survey designed to provide 
communities with reliable and timely social, eco-
nomic, housing, and demographic data every year. 
The Census Bureau uses data collected in the ACS 
to provide estimates on a broad range of population, 
housing unit, and household characteristics for states, 
counties, cities, American Indian and Alaska Native 
areas, tribal subdivision areas, school districts, con-
gressional districts, census tracts, block groups, and 
many other geographic areas.

a calendar year to produce estimates for that year. As 
a result, ACS estimates reflect data that have been 
collected over a period of time rather than for a single 
point in time as in the decennial census, which is con-
ducted every 10 years and provides population counts 
as of April 1 of the census year.

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been col-
lected over a 12-month period and are available for 
geographic areas with at least 65,000 people. Starting 
with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is also produc-
ing 1-year supplemental estimates—simplified versions 
of popular ACS tables—for geographic areas with at 
least 20,000 people. The Census Bureau combines 5 
consecutive years of ACS data to produce multiyear 
estimates for geographic areas with fewer than 65,000 
residents. These 5-year estimates represent data col-
lected over a period of 60 months. 

For those who want more detailed information about 
the ACS—how to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, 
understanding multiyear estimates, knowing which 
geographic areas are covered in the ACS, and how to 
access ACS data on the Census Bureau’s Web site—see 
the Census Bureau’s handbook on Understanding and 
Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know.1 

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 3.5 mil-
lion addresses, with survey information collected 
nearly every day of the year. Data are pooled across 

1 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   1 
What Congress Needs to Know   1

U.S. Census Bureau1. HOW CONGRESS USES ACS DATA

While the main function of the decennial census is to 
provide counts of people for the purpose of appor-
tionment and redistricting, the primary purpose of 
the American Community Survey (ACS) is to measure 
the changing social and economic characteristics of 
the U.S. population—our education, housing, jobs, and 
more. 

ACS content is designed to meet the needs of fed-
eral government agencies, and every question on the 
ACS is asked for a statutory or programmatic pur-
pose. For example, questions about how people get to 
work, what time their trip to work usually begins, and 
the length of their commutes are used for planning 
improvements to roads, highways, rail lines, and bus 
routes, and for planning emergency response routes. 
More information about the subjects included in the 
ACS is available in the section on “Understanding the 
ACS: The Basics” in the U.S. Census Bureau’s handbook 
Understanding and Using American Community Survey 
Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.2

Using ACS Data to Allocate Funds and 
Monitor Compliance With Federal Laws

Many laws require the use of ACS or decennial census 
data as the basis for establishing program or grant 
eligibility and for allocating federal program funds. 
For example, ACS data on veteran status and period 
of military service are used to allocate funds to states 
and local areas for employment and job training 
programs for veterans. Income data from the ACS are 
used to determine poverty status, measure economic 
well-being, and assess the need for assistance. Many 
federal programs, including Low-Income Home Energy 
Assistance, Community Development Block Grant, 
National School Lunch Program, Women, Infants, and 
Children (WIC), Head Start, and Americorps use ACS 
income data to allocate formula grants (see Box 1.1). 
The Census Bureau estimates that 132 programs used 
census data, including data from the ACS, to distribute 
more than $675 billion in funds during fiscal year 2015.3

ACS data are also used to monitor compliance with 
federal laws. For example: 

•  ACS data on age, housing, employment, and 

education are used to help the government and 
communities enforce laws, regulations, and poli-
cies against discrimination based on age such as 
the Age Discrimination in Employment Act. 

² U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>

•  Data on age, sex, race/ethnicity, labor force status, 
and work status are used to monitor compliance 
with the Civil Rights Act.

•  ACS data on housing characteristics, such as units 
in a structure, kitchen and plumbing facilities, rent, 
tenure, and selected monthly owner costs, are 
used to implement and assess compliance with the 
National Affordable Housing Act.

Many of the questions on the ACS were previously 
included on the 2000 Census and prior census long-
form questionnaires. However, in the years since the 
ACS achieved full implementation in 2005, questions 
have been added, revised, or removed from the survey. 
For example, questions about household computer 
ownership and Internet access were added to the 
ACS in 2013 as a requirement of the Broadband Data 
Improvement Act of 2008. 

In 2014, the Census Bureau conducted a compre-
hensive assessment of the ACS program, including a 
review of each ACS question. This ACS content review 
sought to determine which federal programs use the 
information collected in response to each question and 
assess how the Census Bureau might reduce respon-
dent burden.4 A summary of federal agencies’ uses of 

  Box 1.1.  Low-Income Home Energy Assistance  
              Program (LIHEAP)

Enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1981, the Low-Income Home 
Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) is a manda-
tory block grant program to the states. The mis-
sion of LIHEAP is to help low-income households 
pay their home energy bills.

Congress established the law’s block grant dis-
tribution formula based on each state’s climate 
and low-income population. The income question 
on the ACS is essential to determining the low-
income population in each state. Implementation 
of the LIHEAP program also relies on data from 
other ACS questions, including age, sex, Hispanic 
origin, relationship, disability status, units in struc-
ture, and occupants per room. LIHEAP program 
administrators also use data from the ACS ques-
tion on selected monthly owner costs to analyze 
current residential energy supply and consump-
tion and to forecast future energy needs.

3 U.S. Census Bureau Library, Uses of Census Bureau Data in 
Federal Funds Distribution, 2017, <www.census.gov/library/working 
-papers/2017/decennial/census-data-federal-funds.html>.

⁴ U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Content 

Review, 2014, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/operations 
-and-administration/2014-content-review.html>.  

2   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
2   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census Bureau  
ACS data from each question is included in the Census 
Bureau’s ACS Handbook of Questions and Current 
Federal Uses.5 The Census Bureau has also developed 
a series of interactive Web pages that explain why 
each question is asked on the ACS. Each page shows 
the question as it appears on the form and allows 
users to explore some of the most popular statistics 
that come from the question at the local level. The 
pages also explain the origin of each question, pri-
vacy concerns, and how the statistics are used to help 
communities.6

How Members of Congress and Staff 
Use ACS Data

The ACS provides a wealth of timely social, economic, 
housing, and demographic data for all congressio-
nal districts and states that can be used in drafting 
legislation, press releases, statements, and constituent 
correspondence; conducting legislative research; and 
developing grant formulas for proposed programs. 

The Census Bureau releases annual ACS data for each 
of the 435 congressional districts. Members and staff 
can use these data to produce current snapshots of 
the characteristics of their districts. 

TIP: Members of Congress can also compare ACS esti-
mates with those of previous years to look at trends 
over time. However, congressional district data from the 
2012 ACS and later years reflect the new boundaries 
that were drawn after the 2010 Census, while ACS data 
for earlier years reflect the 2000 Census boundaries. 
Given the major changes to district boundaries after 
each  census,  a  comparison  of  congressional  district 
data  between  2011  and  2012  and  later  years  is  not 
advisable.7 Data users should also use caution when 
working with ACS estimates for districts that have been 
subject to intercensal redistricting. 

Following are some examples of how congres-
sional staff can use ACS data to carry out their 
responsibilities.  

Cosponsoring Legislation

The breadth of ACS data can support research for a 
wide variety of potential bills. For example, if a senator 

wants to draft a housing assistance bill that targets 
people who are spending 30 percent or more of their 
income on housing expenses, the ACS provides esti-
mates of the number and characteristics of homeown-
ers and renters who spend 30 percent or more of their 
income on housing and utilities. Congress can use 
these data to allocate funds to state and local govern-
ments through a formula grant.  

Drafting a Floor Statement

Members of Congress sometimes need to make floor 
statements on very short notice. For example, a mem-
ber who wants to make a speech about the economy 
might ask his or her staff to quickly determine the 
proportion of families in the district living below the 
poverty level and how that figure compares with the 
national poverty rate. These data are readily available 
in published ACS tables.  

Responding to a Constituent Inquiry

Constituents occasionally send letters or call their 
member’s office to ask why they were selected to 
participate in the ACS. Members and their staffs 
need to understand how addresses are selected, how 
personal information is protected, what questions are 
asked in the questionnaire, and how Congress uses the 
responses to write legislation and assist constituents. 
The Census Bureau provides answers to these and 
other common constituent questions in a two-page 
flyer available for download from the ACS Web site.8 
Specific answers as to why each question is asked are 
also provided in a series of interactive Web pages.9

Some respondents are reluctant to answer the ACS 
because of concerns about the confidentiality of the 
data. However, the final published statistics do not 
reveal names, addresses, or any other information 
that would identify any individual respondent, and 
strict confidentiality laws protect all ACS informa-
tion that could be used to identify individuals or 
households, under the authority of Title 13 of the 
U.S. Code.10 This is true even for interagency com-
munication: other government agencies do not have 
the legal right to access individuals’ confidential 
information.

⁵ U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Handbook of 

Questions and Current Federal Uses, 2014, <www.census.gov 
/programs-surveys/acs/operations-and-administration/2014-content 
-review/federal-uses.html>.

⁶ U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Questions on 
the Form and Why We Ask, <www.census.gov/acs/www/about/why 
-we-ask-each-question/>.

⁷ Note: 2011 Data Profiles for congressional districts are available 

through the Census Bureau’s file transfer protocol server,  
<https://www2.census.gov/acs2011_1yr/CD113/>.

⁸ U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), ACS 
Resources for Congress Flyer, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/library/outreach-materials/flyers/acs-constituent-answers.html>. 

⁹ U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Questions on 
the Form and Why We Ask, <www.census.gov/acs/www/about/why 
-we-ask-each-question/>.

10 U.S. Census Bureau, Data Protection and Privacy Program, Title  

13 - Protection of Confidential Information, <www.census.gov/about 
/policies/privacy/data_stewardship/title_13_-_protection_of 
_confidential_information.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   3 
What Congress Needs to Know   3

U.S. Census BureauAnalyzing Legislative Proposals

Members receive a wide variety of legislative propos-
als that require detailed evaluation. The ACS pro-
vides a broad range of social, economic, housing, 
and demographic data that can help staff conduct 

these assessments. For example, if an advocacy group 
sends a proposal to reform the Social Security system, 
ACS data on labor force participation and disability 
could be used to evaluate how many people would be 
affected by this proposal.  

4   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
4   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census Bureau2. ACS DATA PRODUCTS FOR CONGRESSIONAL 
    USES

Data.census.gov

Data.census.gov is the U.S. Census Bureau's primary tool 
for accessing population, housing, and economic data 
from the American Community Survey (ACS), the Puerto 
Rico Community Survey, the decennial census, and many 
other Census Bureau data sets.11 Data.census.gov pro-
vides access to ACS data for a wide range of geographic 
areas, including states, cities, congressional districts, 
counties, census tracts, and block groups. For more 
information about data.census.gov, view the Census 
Bureau’s data.census.gov Resources page.12

Accessing ACS Data Through the My 
Congressional District Tool

My Congressional District is a specialized tool that 
allows members of Congress and their staff to eas-
ily access and view population and housing estimates 
for congressional districts from the most recent ACS 
1-year estimates, as well as business data from the 
Census Bureau’s latest County Business Patterns 

database.13 The tool displays tables of the latest ACS 
1-year estimates for selected characteristics, including:

•  People: Demographic measures including sex and 
age, race, Hispanic or Latino origin, place of birth, 
ancestry, veteran status, disability status, and resi-
dence 1 year ago.

•  Workers: Employment status, commuting to work, 

occupation, industry, and class of worker.

•  Housing: Housing occupancy, housing tenure 

(owner or renter), year householder moved into 
unit, value of home, mortgage status, selected 
monthly owner costs, and gross rent.

•  Socioeconomic: Income and benefits, health insur-
ance coverage, and poverty status for families and 
for individuals by age.

•  Education: School enrollment and educational 

attainment.

To access estimates from My Congressional District, 
select a state and choose a congressional district using 
the drop-down menus (see Figure 2.1). There is also an 

11 U.S. Census Bureau, Data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.
12 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov Resources, <www.census 

13 U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov 

.gov/content/census/en/data/what-is-data-census-gov.html>.

/mycd/>.

Figure 2.1.  My Congressional District Home Page 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   5 
What Congress Needs to Know   5

U.S. Census Bureau 
option to identify a congressional district by entering a 
ZIP code.

After selecting a congressional district, select one of 
the six topical areas to browse the data on that topic 
(see Figure 2.2). A box underneath the table gives 
you the option of displaying the data with or without 
accompanying margins of error. For information about 
understanding and using the margins of error for ACS 
estimates, see “Understanding Error and Determining 

Statistical Significance” in the Census Bureau’s hand-
book Understanding and Using American Community 
Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.14 
There is also a “Download and Share” icon under the 
table that allows users to download the data and share 
it on social media platforms, or post it on a blog or 
other Web site.

14 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

Figure 2.2.  Selecting a Topical Area  

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>.

6   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
6   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauIf you click the “Download and Share” icon, you can 
either download a comma-separated values (CSV) file 
with data just for the congressional district you have 
selected or for all districts within the state (see Figure 
2.3). There is also an option to embed the results page 

on a Web site for a specific congressional district. In 
2017, over 70 members of Congress embedded My 
Congressional District on their member Web sites, 
which is a great way to highlight the characteristics of 
their districts to their constituents.

Figure 2.3.  Downloading and Sharing Data  

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>.

Why this tool may be right for you

Why you may want to consider another tool

It contains statistics for every congressional district in 

The geography selection is limited to congres-

a user-friendly and intuitive interface.

sional districts.

It combines ACS data on population, housing, educa-

tion, and the economy with County Business Patterns 

It contains only a subset of all ACS and County 

data on employment, payroll, and establishments by 

Business Patterns topics. 

sector.

The results page can be embedded on your Web site.

sons or selections of multiple congressional 

The tool does not allow side-by-side compari-

districts.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   7 
What Congress Needs to Know   7

U.S. Census Bureau3. CASE STUDIES USING ACS DATA

Case Study #1: Exploring Ancestry Data in My Congressional District

Skill Level: Beginner 
Subject: Ancestry 
Type of Analysis: Analyzing characteristics of a congressional district 
Tool Used: My Congressional District

The ancestry question on the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS) measures the character-
istics of ethnic groups, beyond the Hispanic origin and race questions. Data based on this question help cre-
ate a more detailed picture of cultural groups. Members of Congress and their staffs may be interested in this 
information to better understand the characteristics of their constituents. Federal agencies also use these data 
to enforce the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national 
origin.15 

Accessing data on ancestry and other district-specific information is quick and easy using the My Congressional 
District tool on the Census Bureau’s Web site (see Figure 3.1).16 My Congressional District combines the latest data 
from the ACS and County Business Patterns to provide a detailed set of social, economic, housing, and demo-
graphic characteristics for every congressional district for the current legislative session in the United States.

Figure 3.1.  My Congressional District

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/> 

15 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS) Handbook of Questions and Current Federal Uses, <www.census.gov/programs 

-surveys/acs/operations-and-administration/2014-content-review/federal-uses.html>.

16 U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>.

8   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
8   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauFrom the Web site, use the drop-down boxes (labeled 1 and 2) to choose your state and district (see Figure 3.2). 
If you do not know the district number, you can use the ZIP code search tool, which links users to the U.S. House 
of Representatives district lookup tool.

Figure 3.2.  Selecting District From My Congressional District Drop-Down Menu

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>.

After you have selected your district, the right side of the window updates with demographic, socioeconomic, 
housing, and employment information about the district. Information is arranged by subject area: People, 
Workers, Housing, Socio-Economic, Education, and Business.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   9 
What Congress Needs to Know   9

U.S. Census BureauNativity information is found within the “People” topic, which is the default display when a user first chooses a 
district (see Figure 3.3). Information for Sex and Age are displayed first, but you can use the gray bar on the right 
to scroll down to information about Ancestry. Members of Congress and their staffs can use this information to 
better understand the ancestral makeup of their constituents. For example, in 2017, there were 2,375 people of 
Czech ancestry in California Congressional District 49. 

Figure 3.3.  Ancestry Information for California Congressional District 49

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>. 

To view information in any of the other subject areas, click on the associated icon.

10   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
10   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauUsers who are interested in knowing the margin of error—or level of uncertainty—associated with the estimates 
can view that information by checking the box “Display ACS Margin of Error” below the data table (see Figure 
3.4). The estimate of people with Czech ancestry has a margin of error of +/-956, indicating a high likelihood that 
the true value of this estimate falls somewhere between 1,419 and 3,331 in California Congressional District 49.  

Figure 3.4.  Ancestry Data With Margin of Error

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   11 
What Congress Needs to Know   11

U.S. Census BureauThe My Congressional District tool offers several options for downloading and sharing data (see Figures 3.5 and 
3.6). Clicking on the “Download and Share” icon allows users to download a comma-separated values (CSV) 
file with all the data for their district or for all districts in their state. Users can also share their results on social 
media platforms or download a widget, which can be embedded on a Web site to display the most recent data 
available for the selected congressional district.

Figure 3.5.  Downloading Data for Congressional District

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>.

12   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
12   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 3.6.  Downloading and Sharing Data for Congressional District

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>.

Data displayed in the application are for the most recent year available. Details on exact year and data source, as 
well as any important notes, can be found by scrolling to the bottom of each data table. 

ACS estimates for other geographic areas can be found in data.census.gov, the Census Bureau’s primary tool for 
accessing population, housing, and economic data from the ACS, the Puerto Rico Community Survey, the decen-
nial census, and many other Census Bureau data sets.17 Data.census.gov provides comprehensive access to ACS 
tables for a wide range of geographic areas, including states, congressional districts, cities, counties, census 
tracts, and block groups.

17 U.S. Census Bureau, Data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   13 
What Congress Needs to Know   13

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #2: Finding Selected Housing Characteristics for a Congressional 
District

Skill Level: Intermediate/Advanced 
Subject: Housing 
Type of Analysis: Analyzing housing characteristics within a congressional district 
Tool Used: Data.census.gov

The U.S. Census Bureau’s My Congressional District tool offers a quick and easy solution for finding the latest 
American Community Survey (ACS) data on population and housing characteristics in a congressional district.18 
What if a congressional staffer needs more detailed information? For example, suppose they need to find infor-
mation about the distribution of rental cost burden within his or her district to assess the potential demand for a 
rental assistance program. 

To answer this question, go to the data.census.gov Web site at <https://data.census.gov/>. Choose Advanced 
Search under the search bar that says, “I’m looking for …” This brings you to the Advanced Search window (see 
Figures 3.7 and 3.8).

Figure 3.7.  Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

18 U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov/mycd/>.

14   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
14   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 3.8.  Using Advanced Search in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   15 
What Congress Needs to Know   15

U.S. Census BureauTo find information on a congressional district, start with the “Geography” filter and click “Congressional District.” 
Congressional districts are nested within states, so first select your state. Then select your district number, mak-
ing sure to select the correct legislative session (for example, 115th Congress). Ensure that a check mark appears 
next to the district you have selected and that the geography shows as a selected filter at the bottom of the 
screen (see Figure 3.9).

TIP: If you also add the year to your selections under the “Years” filter (for example, Years>2017), you do not 
have to worry about selecting the wrong legislative session as the congressional district will default to the cor-
responding session.

Figure 3.9.  Selecting a Congressional District in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

16   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
16   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauAfter selecting the congressional district, you can choose the data product of interest. In this example, we are 
interested in a table called DP04: “Selected Housing Characteristics,” which is a data profile that includes fre-
quently requested housing data. To select this table, click on “Surveys” to display a list of available data products. 
Then select “ACS 1-Year Estimates Data Profiles” (see Figure 3.10) and click “Search” in the bottom right corner.

Figure 3.10.  Selecting a Data Product in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   17 
What Congress Needs to Know   17

U.S. Census BureauClicking “Search” with your selected filters brings you to the All Results page. This page has a quick statistic at 
the top of the page relevant to your search. Underneath, there is a list of the three most relevant tables. To view 
the full list of available data profiles, select “View All Tables” (see Figure 3.11). 

Figure 3.11.  Navigating the All Results Page

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

18   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
18   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauSelecting the option to view all tables brings you to the Table Results page with a full list of relevant tables in the 
left pane and a preview of each selected table in the right pane. Click on “Selected Housing Characteristics” to 
preview the table, and select “Customize Table” in the upper right corner to view the table with all download and 
customization options (see Figure 3.12).

Figure 3.12.  Selecting the Table From the Tables Pane

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   19 
What Congress Needs to Know   19

U.S. Census BureauNow you can view the table with customization and download options displayed at the top (see Figure 3.13). 
You can scroll through the table for information, and you have the option to collapse sections by clicking on the 
down arrow next to each category. You also have the option to transpose the table, show and hide margins of 
error using the “Margin of Error” button, and move and/or lock different columns by dragging and dropping the 
column headers.

Figure 3.13.  Viewing the Table in the Customize Table Page

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

To view information about rental cost burden, scroll down to the very bottom of the table to a section titled 
“Gross Rent as a Percentage of Household Income (GRAPI)” (see Figure 3.14). This section includes a distribution 
of rental cost as a percentage of household income, so you can use cost burden limits proposed or set by the 
program to determine which categories you would like to include in your reporting.

Figure 3.14.  Finding Gross Rent as a Percentage of Household Income (GRAPI)

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

20   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
20   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauIf you would like to save this specific block of data from the table, the easiest way to do this is to highlight the 
section of interest, right click, and then select “Copy with headers.” Your selection is then copied into your 
clipboard with the column headers as well as the geography name (in this case, the name of the congressional 
district) and can be pasted into another application (see Figure 3.15).

Figure 3.15.  Copying Selections of Interest

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   21 
What Congress Needs to Know   21

U.S. Census BureauIf you would like to download the table in CSV format, click on “Download” in the tool bar at the top of the page 
(see Figure 3.16). You can then change the year or select multiple years. When you finish making your selections, 
click “Download” in the bottom right corner.

Figure 3.16.  Downloading the Full Table as a CSV File

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

22   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
22   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #3: Poverty and Income Data for New Markets Tax Credit 

Skill Level: Intermediate/Advanced 
Subject: Poverty 
Type of Analysis: Analyses of poverty estimates within a community 
Tool Used: Data.census.gov

New Market Tax Credits (NMTC) provide a way for certified Community Development Entities (CDEs) to provide 
below-market rate financing for qualified businesses in low-income communities. The program is administered 
by the U.S. Department of the Treasury through a competitive application process. One of the qualifying criteria 
is that the business or development project must be in a low-income community. According to U.S. Code, low-
income communities are census tracts where the poverty rate is at least 20 percent, or the median family income 
is less than 80 percent of the state or metropolitan statistical area median family income.19 

Congressional staff can use the American Community Survey (ACS) to determine which census tracts within 
their districts qualify as “low income” and whether a potential project is in an eligible census tract. For example, 
assume you are a staff member in the office of Virginia’s 6th District and want to determine whether four census 
tracts in the city of Roanoke would qualify as low-income communities under NMTC criteria.

Start by navigating to the data.census.gov Web site at <https://data.census.gov>. Click “Advanced Search” under 
the search bar. This will bring you to the Advanced Search page (see Figures 3.17 and 3.18). 

Figure 3.17.  Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

19 Legal Information Institute, 26 U.S. Code § 45D. New markets tax credit, <www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/26/45D>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   23 
What Congress Needs to Know   23

U.S. Census BureauFigure 3.18.  Using Advanced Search in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

24   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
24   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauTo access information about census tracts in Roanoke, Virginia:

•  Begin with the Geography filter. Select “Geography” in the navigation pane on the left side of the screen. 

This expands a list of all the available geographic levels.

•  Move the white button to the right to show Summary Levels. 

•  Select “140 - Census Tract.” 

•  Then scroll to select “Virginia” from the “140 - Census Tract (State)” filter. 

•  Next, scroll to select “Roanoke city, Virginia” from the “Virginia (County)” filter. 

•  Scroll to check the boxes of your desired tracts from the “Roanoke city, Virginia” filter. For this case study, 

check Census Tracts 9, 10, 24, and 25, of Roanoke city, Virginia (see Figure 3.19).

•  Then click “Search” in the bottom right corner.

Figure 3.19.  Selecting Geographic Areas by Using Advanced Search Filters

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   25 
What Congress Needs to Know   25

U.S. Census BureauOn the search results page, you can preview a list of available tables by selecting either “View All Tables” or by 
clicking on “Tables” at the top of the page (see Figure 3.20). 

Figure 3.20.  Viewing Available Tables for Selected Census Tracts

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

26   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
26   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauOn the left side of the page, you will see a list of available tables, while the right side of the page will display a 
preview of the selected table. To find your desired table, you can either use the scroll bar or enter an additional 
filter. Since the desired table is not shown on the first page, select “Filter.” Select “Topics,” and then use the filters 
to select “Income and Poverty,” “Poverty,” and “Poverty” again. To preview the available poverty tables, collapse 
the filter menu by clicking the chevron above “Hide” in the upper right corner of the filter window (see Figure 
3.21). 

Figure 3.21.  Selecting Table Topic Filters

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Select “Poverty Status in the Past 12 Months” to preview the table. For the purposes of this case study, we are 
using 2017 ACS 5-year estimates. You can select the desired survey year by clicking on the “Product” selection and 
then selecting “2017: ACS 5-Year Estimates Subject Tables.” You can either view the table in data.census.gov or 
download the table to view the data in another format. For this example, we will view the table in data.census.gov 
(see Figure 3.22). 

Figure 3.22.  Viewing the Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   27 
What Congress Needs to Know   27

U.S. Census BureauUse the horizontal scroll bar to view all the tract-level estimates and their associated margins of error. In this 
example, all four tracts have poverty rates higher than 20 percent. To make sure that the lower bound of the 
confidence interval for each poverty rate estimate does not fall below 20 percent, subtract the margin of error 
from each poverty rate estimate. For example, the poverty rate for Census Tract 9 is 38.9 percent and the margin 
of error is 9.2 percent. The lower bound is 38.9 minus 9.2 or 29.7 percent. The lower bound remains above 20 
percent for all four of these census tracts.20 

The second criteria for NMTC eligibility is a requirement that the median family income for a census tract not 
exceed 80 percent of the median family income for the metropolitan statistical area (if the tract is part of a met-
ropolitan or micropolitan statistical area) or for the state (if the tract is not part of a metropolitan statistical area). 
Since we already know the table ID that contains these data, type “B19113” into the search bar at the top of the 
page. Then select “Median Family Income in the Past 12 Months (In 2017 Inflation-Adjusted Dollars)” (see Figure 
3.23). 

Figure 3.23.  Searching for a Table

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Click on the “Product” selection and select “2017: ACS 5-Year Estimates Subject Tables.” Since the table shows 
the United States as the default geography, you need to filter by geography to add the census tracts and metro-
politan statistical area required for your analysis. Select “Geographies” (see Figure 3.24). 

Figure 3.24.  Changing the Geography Selection for a Table

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

20 Statistical testing would be needed to determine whether this poverty estimate is significantly different from 20 percent. For more 

information, see the section on “Understanding Error and Determining Statistical Significance” in the Census Bureau’s handbook Understanding 
and Using American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

28   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
28   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census BureauAdd the four census tracts to your “Selected Filters.” Because these four tracts are part of the Roanoke, VA Metro 
Area, add this area to your filters, as shown in Figure 3.25.

Figure 3.25.  Adding the Metropolitan Statistical Area Geography

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

After closing the filter menu, make sure that the 2017 ACS 5-year estimates are selected. Then select “Download” 
from the menu at the top of the screen. Check that the default download specifications in the “Download Tables” 
window are correct and select “Download” again (see Figure 3.26). 

Figure 3.26.  Downloading a Table With Median Family Income in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   29 
What Congress Needs to Know   29

U.S. Census BureauSelect “Download Now” after the file is prepared (see Figure 3.27).

Figure 3.27.  Downloading the Compressed (ZIP) File

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

From the compressed folder, open the file with “data_with_overlays” shown in the file name to analyze the data 
in a spreadsheet.

Divide median family income for each of the tracts by the median family income of the Roanoke Metropolitan 
Statistical Area ($66,334). The results suggest that none of the tracts have median family income values that 
exceed 80 percent of the median family income for the Roanoke Metropolitan Statistical Area. However, a 
statistical test would be needed to confirm that this is correct. For more information about statistical tests, see 
the section on “Understanding Error and Determining Statistical Significance” in the Census Bureau’s handbook 
Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.21 

21 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov 

/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

30   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
30   What Congress Needs to Know

U.S. Census Bureau4. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

U.S. Census Bureau, What Is the American Community Survey? 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/about.html>. 

U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: 
What All Data Users Need to Know  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks/general.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Resources for Congress Flyer  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/library/outreach-materials/flyers/acs-constituent-answers.html>. 

U.S. Census Bureau, Questions on the Form and Why We Ask  
<www.census.gov/acs/www/about/why-we-ask-each-question/>.

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Handbook of Questions and Current Federal Uses  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/operations-and-administration/2014-content-review/federal-uses.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, Library, Uses of Census Bureau Data in Federal Funds Distribution  
<www.census.gov/library/working-papers/2017/decennial/census-data-federal-funds.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Releases 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data-releases.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, Geography and ACS  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography-acs.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Tables and Tools  
<www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and-tools/>.

U.S. Census Bureau, Data.census.gov: Census Bureau’s New Data Dissemination Platform Release Notes and 
Frequently Asked Questions  
<https://data.census.gov/assets/releasenotes/faqs-release-notes.pdf>.

U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov Resources 
<www.census.gov/data/what-is-data-census-gov.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District 
<www.census.gov/mycd/>.

U.S. Census Bureau, State Data Center (SDC) Program  
<www.census.gov/about/partners/sdc.html>.  

American Community Survey Online Community 
<https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   31 
What Congress Needs to Know   31

U.S. Census Bureau