An ofﬁcial website of the United States government Here’s how you know

Unfamiliar with the many ways you can obtain statistics from the American Community Survey (ACS)? Learn more about the too

available to help you access current social, economic, housing, and demographic statistics for the nation's communities.

Congressional Staffer

Mariam, in Congressman Underwood's ofﬁce, needs updated information about the congressman's constituents with the latest

congressional district boundaries. She would also like to post this information on the congressman's website to share with

interested parties.

Recommendation: My Congressional District

Learn more about My Congressional District and link to the tool

Tribal Planner

Chava is a tribal planner looking for information about the people and housing in her tribal area to plan
future improvements. She is working on a tight deadline, and needs a way to quickly access tribal statistics
on a variety of topics.

Recommendation: My Tribal Area

Find out why and link to the tool

Mayor

Mayor Garcia is looking for key facts about the people and businesses in her town before heading to the statewide conference o
mayors. She wants to be able to quickly compare facts from her town to other towns in her state.

Recommendation: QuickFacts

Find out why and link to the tool

Emergency Planner

Chief Ryan, a county emergency planner, needs an easy way to access selected statistics, such as language spoken at home,
age of housing units, and vehicle availability, to help his community recover from disasters, natural hazards, and weather events

Recommendation: OnTheMap for Emergency Management

Learn more about OnTheMap for Emergency Management

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

Business Owner

Faraj wants information about potential customers, similar businesses, and consumer spending to ﬁgure out where to locate his

gas station. He's looking for key data that is relevant to small business owners, and he may decide to insert a report or map in a

business plan for his investors.

Recommendation: Census Business Builder

Find out more about Census Business Builder

Student

Justin is a student preparing to give a presentation about his local community. He is searching for a credible report that contains

high level statistics to describe the community and visual aids that can be used in the presentation.

Recommendation: Narrative Proﬁles

Learn more about Narrative Proﬁles

Educator

Jocelyn wants information about a variety of topics, such as language spoken at home, disability, and age, to help ﬁgure out wha
kinds of services and staff they will need in her school district. She is also interested in seeing if these characteristics changed

over time, and if these changes are statistically signiﬁcant. Jocelyn wants this high-level information in separate fact sheets on
social, economic, demographic, and housing characteristics for her area.

Recommendation: Data Proﬁles or Comparison Proﬁles (on data.census.gov)

Learn more about Data Proﬁles and Comparison Proﬁles

Veterans Coordinator

Carlos is interested in veterans, including veterans status, period of service, employment status, and educational attainment, to
help his organization provide information on Veterans Affairs medical services and job training programs. He would like the

information on his topic in one table with numbers and percentages.

Recommendation: Subject Tables (on data.census.gov)

Find out more about the Subject Tables

Market Analyst

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

Thomas wants in-depth information about topics such as income, educational attainment, and household size, for his report on
where to locate a large retail store. He's looking for the most detailed information the ACS provides on these topics.

Recommendation: Detailed Tables (on data.census.gov)

Find out more about Detailed Tables

Media

Tyson, a reporter for a local newspaper, is looking for a visual way to show trends in his community. He has some topics in mind
that will be of interest to his readers, and hopes to be able to use available maps directly in his news reports.

Recommendation: Census Mapping Tools

Find out why and link to the tools

Health Administrator

Benjamin wants to create his own tables of interest using Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) ﬁles, but he does not have acce

to statistical software. He needs a free tool to create custom tabulations to plan for health care needs in his state.

Recommendation: microdata access on data.census.gov

Learn more about microdata access on data.census.gov

Regional Planner

Marisa wants to do regional planning analysis using Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) ﬁles, and she has expertise using
statistical software. Marisa is an advanced data user who is comfortable working with untabulated records to do research project

Recommendation: Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS)

Learn more about the Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS)

Developer

Karen wants to create mobile apps and custom widgets for her customers across a variety of topics. She is an experienced
programmer, but appreciates the support that can be found in a community of developers and a well-documented dataset.

Recommendation: API

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

Find out more about the Application Programming Interface

[https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

