Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Federal Agencies Need to Know

Issued March 2021

Acknowledgments

Linda A. Jacobsen, Vice President, U.S. Programs, Population Reference 
Bureau (PRB), and Mark Mather, Associate Vice President, U.S. Programs, 
PRB, drafted this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey Office. Other PRB staff who assisted in draft-
ing and reviewing the handbook include Beth Jarosz, Lillian Kilduff, Kelvin 
Pollard, and Paola Scommegna. 

Some of the material in this handbook was adapted from the Census 
Bureau’s 2008 publication, A Compass for Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What Federal Agencies Need to Know, 
drafted by Frederick J. Eggers.

Nicole Scanniello, Gretchen Gooding, and Charles Gamble, Census Bureau, 
contributed to the planning and review of the handbook series.

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of Albert E. 
Fontenot Jr., Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs, Deborah M. 
Stempowski, Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs, and Donna M. 
Daily, Chief, American Community Survey Office.

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the review 
and release of these handbooks include Eunha Choi, Gail Denby, Nathan 
Ramsey, R. Chase Sawyer, Nicholas Spanos, Michael Starsinic, and G. Brian 
Wilson.

Faye E. Brock, Linda Chen, and Christine E. Geter provided publication 
management, graphic design and composition, and editorial review for the 
print and electronic media under the direction of Corey Beasley, Acting 
Chief of the Graphic and Editorial Services Branch, Public Information Office.

Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Federal Agencies Need to Know

Issued March 2021

U.S. Department of Commerce 
Wynn Coggins, 
Acting Agency Head

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Dr. Ron Jarmin, 
Acting Director

Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau,  
Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey  
Data: What Federal Agencies 
Need to Know, U.S. Government 
Publishing Office, Washington, DC, 
2021.

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Dr. Ron Jarmin, 
Acting Director and
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer

Albert E. Fontenot Jr., 
Associate Director for Decennial Census 
Programs

Deborah M. Stempowski, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office

Contents

1. Topics Covered in the ACS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

2. How Federal Agencies Use ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

3. How a Question Becomes Part of the ACS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

4. Considerations When Working With ACS Data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

5. Accessing ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

6. Case Studies Using ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

7. Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   iii 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   iii

U.S. Census Bureau 
This page is intentionally blank.

UNDERSTANDING AND USING AMERICAN  
COMMUNITY SURVEY DATA: 
WHAT FEDERAL AGENCIES NEED TO KNOW 

The American Community Survey (ACS) is the nation’s 
premier source of detailed social, economic, housing, 
and demographic characteristics for local communi-
ties. The ACS is unique among U.S. household surveys 
because of its size, breadth of measurement, provi-
sion of annual estimates for small geographic areas, 
and extensive use by a wide range of government 
and nongovernmental organizations. The U.S. Census 
Bureau estimates that 132 programs used census 
data—including data from the ACS—to distribute more 
than $675 billion in funds during fiscal year 2015.1 
Federal agencies rely on the ACS to help them make 
operational decisions, including managing and evaluat-
ing programs, determining eligibility for programs, and 
benchmarking other statistics.

This handbook describes how analysts, program 
administrators, and policymakers within federal agen-
cies can use the ACS in carrying out the business of 
their agencies.

What Is the American Community 
Survey?

The ACS is a nationwide survey designed to provide 
communities with reliable and timely social, economic, 
housing, and demographic data every year. A sepa-
rate annual survey, called the Puerto Rico Community 
Survey (PRCS), collects similar data about the popu-
lation and housing units in Puerto Rico. The Census 
Bureau uses data collected in the ACS and the PRCS 
to provide estimates on a broad range of population, 
housing unit, and household characteristics for states, 
counties, cities, school districts, congressional districts, 
census tracts, block groups, and many other geo-
graphic areas.

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 3.5 million 
addresses, with survey information collected nearly 
every day of the year. Data are pooled across a calen-
dar year to produce estimates for that year. As a result, 
ACS estimates reflect data that have been collected 
over a period of time rather than for a single point in 
time as in the decennial census, which is conducted 
every 10 years and provides population counts as of 
April 1 of the census year.

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been col-
lected over a 12-month period and are available for 
geographic areas with at least 65,000 people. Starting 
with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is also produc-
ing “1-year Supplemental Estimates”—simplified ver-
sions of popular ACS tables for geographic areas with 
at least 20,000 people. The Census Bureau combines 
5 consecutive years of ACS data to produce multiyear 
estimates for geographic areas with fewer than 65,000 
residents. These 5-year estimates represent data col-
lected over a period of 60 months.

For more detailed information about the ACS—how 
to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, understand-
ing multiyear estimates, knowing which geographic 
areas are covered in the ACS, and how to access ACS 
data on the Census Bureau’s Web site—see the Census 
Bureau’s handbook on Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users 
Need to Know.2

1 U.S. Census Bureau, Uses of Census Bureau Data in Federal Funds 

Distribution, 2017, <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/decennial/2020/program-management/working-papers 
/Uses-of-Census-Bureau-Data-in-Federal-Funds-Distribution.pdf>.

2 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   1 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   1

U.S. Census Bureau1. TOPICS COVERED IN THE ACS

The primary purpose of the American Community 
Survey (ACS) is to help Congress determine funding 
and policies for a wide variety of federal programs. 
Because of this, the topics covered by the ACS are 
diverse (see Table 1.1).

•

•

•

Examples of social characteristics include disabil-
ity, educational attainment, language spoken at
home, and veteran status.

Examples of economic characteristics include
employment status, health insurance, income, and
earnings.

Examples of housing characteristics include com-
puter and Internet use, selected monthly owner
costs, rent, and the year the structure was built.

• Demographic characteristics include age, sex, race,
Hispanic origin, and relationship to householder.

TIP: The ACS was designed to provide estimates of 
the characteristics of the population, not to provide 
counts of the population in different geographic 
areas or population subgroups. For basic counts of 
the U.S. population by age, sex, race, and Hispanic 
origin, visit the U.S. Census Bureau’s Population and 
Housing Unit Estimates Web page.3 

3 U.S. Census Bureau, Population and Housing Unit Estimates, 

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest.html>. 

A good way to learn about the topics covered in the 
ACS is to explore the information available through 
the U.S. Census Bureau’s data.census.gov Web site.4 
The Data Profiles in data.census.gov, which include the 
most frequently requested social, economic, hous-
ing, and demographic data, are useful for novice users 
who want to explore the range of topics available.5 
Copies of ACS questionnaires for different years are 
also available on the Census Bureau’s Web site.6 For 
more detailed information about the topics in the ACS, 
see the section on Understanding the ACS: The Basics 
in the Census Bureau’s handbook on Understanding 
and Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know.7

4 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.
5 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Data Profiles, 

<https://data.census.gov/cedsci/table?text=DP>. 

6 U.S. Census Bureau, Questionnaire Archive, <www.census.gov 
/programs-surveys/acs/methodology/questionnaire-archive.html>.
7 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

2   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
2   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau  Table 1.1. Population and Housing Data Included in American Community Survey Data Products 

Social Characteristics
Ancestry
Citizenship Status
Citizen Voting-Age Population
Disability Status1
Educational Attainment
Fertility
Grandparents as Caregivers
Language Spoken at Home
Marital History2
Marital Status
Migration/Residence 1 Year Ago
Period of Military Service
Place of Birth
School Enrollment
Undergraduate Field of 

Degree3

Veteran Status2
Year of Entry

Economic Characteristics
Class of Worker
Commuting (Journey to Work)
Employment Status
Food Stamps/Supplemental 

Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP)4

Health Insurance Coverage2
Income and Earnings
Industry and Occupation
Place of Work
Poverty Status
Work Status Last Year

Housing Characteristics
Computer and Internet Use5
House Heating Fuel
Kitchen Facilities
Occupancy/Vacancy Status
Occupants Per Room

Plumbing Facilities6
Rent
Rooms/Bedrooms
Selected Monthly Owner Costs
Telephone Service Available
Tenure (Owner/Renter)
Units in Structure
Value of Home
Vehicles Available
Year Householder Moved Into 

Unit

Year Structure Built

Demographic Characteristics
Age and Sex
Group Quarters Population
Hispanic or Latino Origin
Race
Relationship to Householder
Total Population

1 Questions on Disability Status were significantly revised in the 2008 survey to cause a break in series. 
2 Marital History, Veterans’ Service-Connected Disability Status and Ratings, and Health Insurance Coverage were added in the 2008 survey. 
3 Undergraduate Field of Degree was added in the 2009 survey. 
4 Food Stamp Benefit amount was removed in 2008. 
5 Computer and Internet Use was added to the 2013 survey. 
6 One of the components of Plumbing Facilities, flush toilet, and Business or Medical Office on Property questions were removed in 2016.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   3 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   3

U.S. Census Bureau2. HOW FEDERAL AGENCIES USE ACS DATA

As the successor to the decennial census long form, 
response to the American Community Survey (ACS) 
is required by law. The U.S. Census Bureau considers 
the ACS to be a component of the decennial census 
program; all the statutory language in Census Bureau 
legislation that applies to the decennial census also 
applies to the ACS. The Census Bureau is also bound 
to protect responses to the ACS in the same way that 
it protects responses to the decennial census.

While the Census Bureau considers the ACS to be 
part of the decennial census program, it is up to each 
federal agency to interpret the agency’s legislation and 
to decide how ACS data should be used. The Census 
Bureau’s ACS Handbook of Questions and Current 
Federal Uses provides an overview of why specific 
questions on the ACS are asked, which estimates are 
created from the answers to these questions, and how 
federal agencies and other organizations use these 
estimates.8 The Census Bureau has also developed a 
series of interactive Web pages that explain why each 
question is asked on the ACS. Each page shows the 
question as it appears on the form and allows users to 
explore some of the most popular statistics that come 
from the question at the local level. The pages also 
explain the origin of each question, privacy concerns, 
and how the statistics are used to help communities.9

Many laws require the use of ACS or decennial census 
data as the basis for establishing program or grant 
eligibility and for allocating federal program funds. For 
example, ACS data on veteran status and period of 
military service are used to allocate funds to states and 
local areas for employment and job training programs 
for veterans. Income data from the ACS are used to 
determine poverty status, measure economic well-
being, and assess the need for assistance.

Many federal programs (including Low-Income Home 
Energy Assistance, Community Development Block 
Grant, Older Americans Act, Every Student Succeeds 
Act, Head Start, and Women, Infants, and Children) use 
ACS income data to allocate formula grants (see Box 
2.1).

Box 2.1. Low-Income Home Energy Assistance 
Program (LIHEAP) 42 U.S. Code, 8629(a) & (b)
(2), and 8622(11)

Enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1981, the Low-Income 
Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) is a 
mandatory block grant program for the states.

The mission of LIHEAP is to help low-income 
households pay their home energy bills.

Congress established the law’s block grant dis-
tribution formula based on each state’s weather 
and low-income population. The income 
question on the ACS is essential to determin-
ing the low-income population in each state. 
Implementation of the LIHEAP program also 
relies on data from other ACS questions, includ-
ing age, sex, Hispanic origin, relationship, dis-
ability status, units in structure, and occupants 
per room. LIHEAP program administrators also 
use data from the ACS question on selected 
monthly owner costs to analyze current resi-
dential energy supply and consumption and to 
forecast future energy needs.

ACS data are also used to monitor compliance with 
federal laws. For example:

• ACS data on age, housing, employment, and

education are used to help the government and
communities enforce laws, regulations, and policies
against discrimination based on age such as the
Age Discrimination in Employment Act.

• Data on age, sex, race/ethnicity, labor force status,
and work status last year are used to monitor com-
pliance with the Civil Rights Act.

• ACS data on housing characteristics, such as units

in structure, kitchen and plumbing facilities, rent,
tenure, and selected monthly owner costs, are
used to implement and assess compliance with the
National Affordable Housing Act.

8 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS) 

Handbook of Questions and Current Federal Uses,<www.census.gov 
/programs-surveys/acs/operations-and-administration/2014-content 
-review/federal-uses.html>.

9 U.S. Census Bureau, Questions on the Form and Why We Ask,
<www.census.gov/acs/www/about/why-we-ask-each-question/>.

The following four figures show a few examples of ACS 
questions, and how federal agencies use the results 
from these questions in program eligibility determina-
tions, allocation of funds, and planning.

4   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
4   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.1. Question on Race and Federal Uses of  
                the Data 

Figure 2.2. Question on Health Insurance and  
                 Federal Uses of the Data 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Handbook of Questions and 
Current Federal Uses, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/operations-and-administration/2014-content-review/federal-uses 
.html>.

Examples of Federal Uses

•  Required to identify vulnerable popula-

tions that may be at disproportionate risk 
of experiencing limitations in health care 
access, poor health quality, and suboptimal 
health outcomes.

•  Required to enforce against discrimination 
in education, employment, voting, financial 
assistance, and housing.

•  Used in many reporting and research tasks 
to investigate whether there are race dif-
ferences in education, employment, home 
ownership, health, income and many other 
areas of interest to policymakers.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Handbook of Questions and 
Current Federal Uses, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/operations-and-administration/2014-content-review/federal-uses 
.html>.

Examples of Federal Uses

•  Required to identify vulnerable popula-

tions that may be at disproportionate risk 
of experiencing limitations in health care 
access, poor health quality, and suboptimal 
health outcomes.

•  Used to project the demand for VA 
extended health care services.

•  Used to review and analyze the unmet 
needs of people with disabilities and to 
identify the characteristics of the target 
service population.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   5 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   5

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.3. Question on Vehicles Available and  
Federal Uses of the Data 

Figure 2.4. Question on School Enrollment and  
Federal Uses of the Data

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Handbook of Questions and 
Current Federal Uses, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/operations-and-administration/2014-content-review/federal-uses 
.html>.

Examples of Federal Uses

•

•

•

Required in the enforcement responsibili-
ties under the Voting Rights Act to deter-
mine disparities in voter participation rates
for analysis and for presentation in federal
litigation.

Required in mass transportation and metro-
politan planning to ensure compliance with
the Clean Air Act and implementing regula-
tions, particularly with respect to coordina-
tion and conformity.

Used to summarize the conditions and per-
formance of the nation’s highways, bridges,
and transit.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Handbook of Questions and 
Current Federal Uses, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/operations-and-administration/2014-content-review/federal-uses 
.html>.

Examples of Federal Uses

•

•

Used in the enforcement of nondiscrimina-
tion in education by state and local gov-
ernments, including ensuring appropriate
action to assist English language learners in
overcoming language barriers and monitor-
ing desegregation.

Used to allocate funds to states based on
the number of adults beyond the age of
compulsory school attendance without a
secondary school diploma.

6   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
6   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau3. HOW A QUESTION BECOMES PART OF THE ACS

How a Question Becomes Part of the 
American Community Survey

The U.S. Census Bureau must balance the information 
growing, changing nation with respect for 
needs of a 
the privacy and time of the American public. Adding 
a question or making a change to the American 
Community Survey (ACS) involves extensive test-
ing, review, and evaluation over a 5-year period. This 
The U.S. Census Bureau must balance the information 
ensures the change is necessary and will produce 
needs of a growing, changing nation with respect for the 
quality, useful information for the nation. The Census 
privacy and time of the American public.
Bureau requests authorization from the Office of 

Adding a question or making a change to the American 
Community Survey involves extensive testing, review, 
and evaluation over a 5-year period. This ensures the 
change is necessary and will produce quality, useful 
information for the nation.

Management and Budget (OMB) for any revisions to 
the ACS questionnaire.

Although the timing may vary depending on improve-
ments in testing methods, availability of resources, and 
urgency of the request, the process generally follows 
the evaluation and testing timeline shown in Figure 3.1.
Additionally in conjunction with the Department of 
Commerce’s Office of Chief Counsel, the Census Bureau 
does a periodic validation of the uses of all questions to 
ensure there is a legal basis for them.

August 2017

Though the timing may vary depending on improvements 
in testing methods, availability of resources, and urgency 
of the request, the process generally follows the evalua-
tion and testing timeline below:

Figure 3.1. Timeline for Evaluating and Testing a Proposed New or Changed ACS Question

Preliminary

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Implementation

Step 1.
A federal agency proposes a new or changed survey question

Step 2.
OMB and Census Bureau decide whether the change has merit

Step 3.
Create wording options

Step 4.
Test different ways to ask the question

Step 5.
Evaluate question performance in a field test

Step 6.
OMB solicits public comment; approves
or rejects change

Step 7. 
Census Bureau
implements the change 

1.  A federal agency proposes a new or changed 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, How a Question Becomes Part of the American Community Survey, <www.census.gov 
/content/dam/Census/library/visualizations/2017/comm/acs-questions.pdf>.

survey question

5.  Evaluate question performance in a field test

The requesting agency must show that it needs frequent data at 
small geographies, that no other sources of information are avail-
able, and that its mission would be compromised if the question 
was not added or changed.

Census Bureau staff finalize the wording for the test, create instru-
ments to field the test, develop the systems to process the data 
collected, and conduct the test. Then, they tabulate and analyze the 
results and provide them to the federal agency that requested the 
change.

2.  OMB and Census Bureau decide whether 

the change has merit

6.  Census Bureau solicits public comment; 

approves or rejects change

In consultation with federal agencies, the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) and Census Bureau decide whether the request 
merits further consideration.

3.  Create wording options

Subject matter experts identify ways to ask each question using 
different words and phrases.

4.  Test different ways to ask the question

The Census Bureau conducts cognitive interviews to gauge which 
wording is best understood and produces the most accurate 
results.

Subject matter experts review the cognitive testing results and 
recommend the version for field testing.

The Census Bureau and requesting federal agency review the 
research results and decide whether to recommend implementation 
of the new or changed survey question. The Census Bureau solicits 
public comment through a Federal Register Notice to inform a final 
decision in consultation with the OMB and the Interagency Council 
on Statistical Policy Subcommittee on the ACS.

Note: The Paperwork Reduction Act requires OMB approval of data collections that 
would impose a burden on the American public. It also requires a public comment 
period via the Federal Register.

7.  Census Bureau implements the change

If approved by the OMB, the Census Bureau prepares to implement 
the change by updating systems, questionnaires, and materials. 
Implementation takes effect at the start of a calendar year.

For more information on the ACS, including the process for revising 
and adding questions, see <www.census.gov/ACS>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   7 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   7

U.S. Census BureauEach step in the process is described in more detail 
below:

• A federal agency proposes a new or changed

survey question.
The requesting agency must show that it needs
frequent data for small geographic areas, that no
other sources of information are available, and that
its mission would be compromised if the question
was not added or changed.

• OMB and Census Bureau decide whether the

change has merit.
In consultation with federal agencies, OMB and the
Census Bureau decide whether the request merits
further consideration.

•

•

•

•

•

Create wording options.
Subject-matter experts identify ways to ask each
question using different words and phrases.

Test different ways to ask the question.
The Census Bureau conducts cognitive interviews
to gauge which wording is best understood and
produces the most accurate results. Subject-
matter experts review the cognitive testing results
and recommend the version for field testing.

Evaluate question performance in a field test.
Census Bureau staff finalize the wording for the
test, create instruments to field the test, develop
the systems to process the data collected, and
conduct the test. Then, they tabulate and analyze
the results and provide them to the federal agency
that requested the change.

Census Bureau solicits public comment; approves
or rejects change.
The Census Bureau and requesting federal agency
review the research results and decide whether
to recommend implementation of the new or
changed survey question. The Census Bureau
solicits public comment through a Federal Register
Notice to inform a final decision in consultation
with the OMB and the Interagency Council on
Statistical Policy Subcommittee on the ACS.

Census Bureau implements the change.
If approved by the OMB, the Census Bureau pre-
pares to implement the change by updating sys-
tems, questionnaires, and materials. Implementation
takes effect at the start of a calendar year.

Changes to ACS Questions

Over time, questions have been added, revised, or 
removed from the ACS questionnaire as shown in 
Table 1.1. For example, in 2008 new questions on 
marital history, health insurance coverage, and military 
service-connected disability status were added to the 
form, while the questions on disability were signifi-
cantly revised. Because of the changes to the ques-
tions, the ACS disability estimates for 2008 and later 
years should not be compared with 2007 and prior 
ACS disability estimates. The data from these new and 
revised questions collected in 2008 were first available 
in the ACS products released in 2009. A new question 
on bachelor’s field of degree was added in 2009 with 
data available in 2010. In 2013, three new questions on 
computer ownership and Internet access were added 
with data available in 2014.

When a new question is added to the survey, 1-year 
estimates are available the following year, but it takes 
5 years to accumulate data for small geographic areas. 
While ACS 1-year estimates of health insurance cover-
age were first available in 2009, ACS 5-year estimates 
of coverage (for 2008–2012) were first available in 2013.

The Census Bureau conducts periodic reviews of the 
ACS to consider any deletion or addition of questions. 
In 2014, the Census Bureau conducted a compre-
hensive assessment of the ACS program, including a 
review of each ACS question. This ACS Content Review 
sought to understand which federal programs use the 
information collected by each question and assess how 
the Census Bureau might reduce respondent burden.10 
Based on this assessment, the questions on the pres-
ence of a flush toilet and whether there is a business or 
medical office on the property were removed from the 
ACS beginning with the 2016 survey.

10 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2014 Content 

Review, <www.census.gov/programs- surveys/acs/operations-and 
-administration/2014-content-review.html>.

8   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
8   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau4. CONSIDERATIONS WHEN WORKING WITH

ACS DATA

The greatest strength of the ACS is that it provides 
access to estimates on an annual basis, but this also 
results in an array of options that affect how data can 
be used effectively by federal agencies.

Many agencies require data for relatively small geo-
graphic areas that must rely on ACS 5-year estimates. 
Of the approximately 69,000 states, counties, cities, 
towns, townships, villages, other minor civil divisions, 
and census designated places, more than 90 percent 
rely exclusively on 5-year estimates. About 8 percent 
of these small geographic areas have populations 
of 20,000 or more and receive 1-year Supplemental 
Estimates.

Among counties and county equivalents, 41 percent 
rely on 5-year estimates exclusively, while 59 percent 
receive 1-year Supplemental Estimates and 26 per-
cent meet the 65,000-population threshold needed 
to receive 1-year estimates.11 Data users interested in 
ACS estimates for areas with populations of 65,000 
or more have a choice between the 1-year and 5-year 
data series.

Which Data Should Be Used?

The 1-year estimates for an area reflect the most 
current data but they have larger margins of error 
(MOEs)—indicating less reliability or precision—than 
the 5-year estimates because they are based on a 
smaller sample. The 5-year estimates for an area have 
larger samples and smaller MOEs than the 1-year 
estimates. However, they are less current because the 
larger samples include data that were collected in ear-
lier years. The main advantage of using multiyear esti-
mates is the increased statistical reliability for smaller 
geographic areas and small population groups.12

11 Percentages include data for municipios in Puerto Rico. For 
more information, see the Census Bureau’s ACS Web page on Areas 
Published, available at <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/geography-acs/areas-published.html>. 

12 U.S. Census Bureau, When to Use 1-year, 3-year, or 5-year 
Estimates, <www.census.gov/programs- surveys/acs/guidance 
/estimates.html>. 

In the end, what makes the most sense is a matter of 
judgment regarding the balance between the period 
covered by an estimate and its level of reliability or 
precision. The key is to strive to use the most reliable 
estimates, where the period covered best suits the 
question at hand.

Using ACS Estimates as Building Blocks 
for Larger Geographic Areas

In some cases, data users will need to construct cus-
tom ACS estimates by combining data across multiple 
geographic areas or population subgroups, or it may 
be necessary to derive a new percentage, proportion, 
or ratio from published ACS data. One way to address 
the issue of unreliable estimates for individual census 
tracts or block groups is to aggregate geographic 
areas, yielding larger samples and estimates that are 
more reliable. In such cases, additional calculations are 
needed to produce MOEs and standard errors, and to 
conduct tests of statistical significance for the derived 
estimates. For more information, see the section on 
“Calculating Measures of Error for Derived Estimates” 
in the Census Bureau’s handbook on Understanding 
and Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know.13

Measuring Change Over Time With ACS 
Data

Finally, there is the issue of how to use multiyear 
characterizations of an area to measure change over 
time. As the ACS program has moved forward, a whole 
series of multiyear estimates for various time intervals 
has become available. Data users now have access 
to nonoverlapping ACS 5-year estimates that have 
increased the value and utility of the data for monitor-
ing trends in local communities. However, it is more 
challenging to capture rapid change in areas where 
only ACS 5-year estimates are available.

13 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   9 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   9

U.S. Census BureauConsider the example of a natural disaster, like 
Hurricane Harvey that caused major flooding in Texas 
in 2018. Because data collection is ongoing, the ACS 
can provide essential information about population 
and housing characteristics in Texas both before and 
after the storm. The 1-year ACS estimates are particu-
larly useful in this case because they are based on data 
from the past year. In contrast, 5-year estimates pro-
vide less current information because they are based 
on both data from the previous year and data that are 
2 to 5 years old. For areas experiencing major changes 
over a given time period, the 5-year estimates may be 
quite different from the 1-year estimates for any of the 
individual years.

For more information about ACS multiyear estimates 
and sampling error, see the sections on “Understanding 
and Using ACS Single-Year and Multiyear Estimates” 
and “Understanding Error and Determining Statistical 
Significance” in the Census Bureau’s handbook on 
Understanding and Using American Community Survey 
Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.14

14 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

10   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
10   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau5. ACCESSING ACS DATA

Data.census.gov is the U.S. Census Bureau’s primary 
tool for accessing population, housing, and economic 
data from the American Community Survey (ACS), the 
Puerto Rico Community Survey, the decennial census, 
and many other Census Bureau data sets.15

Data.census.gov provides access to ACS data for a 
wide range of geographic areas, including states, cities, 
counties, census tracts, and block groups. For more 
information about data.census.gov, view the Census 
Bureau’s data.census.gov Resources page.16

More advanced users within federal agencies also 
have several options to access ACS data that are more 
detailed through the downloadable Summary File, 
the Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) files, the 
Census Bureau’s Application Programming Interface, or 
through special tabulations of ACS data.17

Special Tabulations of ACS Data

Most of the data required by federal agencies are 
accessible through published tables available through 
data.census.gov.18 However, several federal agencies 
require special tabulations of ACS data to obtain the 
information they need. For example:

•  The Census Transportation Planning Products 

(CTPP) program produces special tabulations of 
ACS data that have enhanced value for transporta-
tion planning, analysis, and strategic direction.19

•  The Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) 

Tabulation serves as the primary external bench-
mark for comparing the race, ethnicity, and sex 
composition of an organization’s internal work-
force and the analogous external labor market, 
within a specified geography and job category.20

•  The ACS Special Tabulation on Aging serves as a 

component in the allocation formulas for Older 
Americans Act funding and for planning programs 
and services for older adults.21

15 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.
16 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov Resources, <www.census.gov 

/data/what-is-data-census-gov.html>. 

17 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Summary File Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data 
/summary-file.html>; American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS Data, 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata.html>; Developers, 
<www.census.gov/developers/>. 

18 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.
19 AASHTO, CTPP Program, <https://ctpp.transportation.org/>.
20 U.S. Census Bureau, EEO Tabulation, <www.census.gov/topics 
/employment/equal-employment-opportunity-tabulation/about.html>.
21 Administration for Community Living, Aging, Independence, and 
Disability (AGID) Program Data Portal, American Community Survey  
(ACS) Special Tabulations, <https://agid.acl.gov/DataFiles/Special 
Tabulations.aspx>.

•  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 

Development’s Special Tabulations of Households 
provide the most detailed data available for analy-
sis of housing demand based on income and age 
of householder. These data are used in allocation 
formulas for rental assistance programs and evalu-
ations of program applications and multifamily 
mortgage insurance applications submitted to the 
Federal Housing Administration.22

The minimum cost of a custom tabulation by Census 
Bureau staff is $3,000, and the minimum timeframe 
for compiling the data is 8 weeks. The Census Bureau’s 
Disclosure Review Board must review and approve all 
requests before work is started. For more information, 
see the Census Bureau’s Web page on Custom Tables.23

Federal Statistical Research Data 
Centers

Federal agencies can also access ACS data through the 
Federal Statistical Research Data Centers (FSRDCs)—
partnerships between federal statistical agencies and 
leading research institutions.24 FSRDCs are secure 
facilities managed by the Census Bureau to provide 
secure access to a range of restricted-use microdata, 
including ACS microdata. Compared to the ACS PUMS, 
which includes a representative subset of records 
from the ACS sample, the restricted data files contain 
many additional sample records along with additional 
variables. Note that FSRDC projects must be designed 
to produce model-based output. Only tabular output 
supporting the model sample(s) may be released to 
researchers.

FSRDC researchers have access to computing capac-
ity to handle large data sets and complex calculations. 
Standard statistical, econometric, and programming 
software, including R, Stata, SAS, MATLAB, and Gauss, 
are available in a Linux environment. FSRDC research-
ers can collaborate with other research data center 
researchers across the United States through the 
secure FSRDC computing environment.

Data access via an FSRDC requires a proposal and 
approval process including background checks on 
researchers. The approval process, while straight-
forward, can take several months. Inquiries about 

22 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of 
Policy Development and Research, Special Tabulations of Households, 
<www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/spectabs.html>. 

23 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Custom 

Tables, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/custom-tables 
.html>. 

24 U.S. Census Bureau, Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, 

<www.census.gov/fsrdc>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   11 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   11

U.S. Census Bureauaccessing ACS or other restricted-use data can be 
made through the ResearchDataGov application 
portal.25

The Census Bureau’s Center for Enterprise 
Dissemination and the FSRDCs consider proposals 
from qualified researchers in social science disciplines 
consistent with the subject matter of the surveys and 
censuses collected by the Census Bureau.26 Proposals 
may be submitted at any time and must:

•

Provide benefit to Census Bureau programs.

• Demonstrate scientific merit.

•

•

•

Require nonpublic data.

Be feasible given the data.

Pose no risk of disclosure.

All FSRDC researchers must obtain Census Bureau 
Special Sworn Status—passing a moderate-risk back-
ground check and swearing to protect respondent con-
fidentiality for life, facing significant financial and legal 
penalties under Title 13 and Title 26 of the U.S. Code for 
failure to do so.27

When researchers need to remove aggregated output, 
tables, or model coefficients from the secure environ-
ment, the output must be reviewed to ensure the confi-
dentiality of survey respondents and that the output is 
consistent with the original proposal. Once the results 
pass disclosure review, the approved aggregated data 
are provided to the researcher or team outside of the 
secure computing environment, usually via e-mail. The 
researcher(s) can then produce reports, presentations, 
and other products outside of the secure environment.

25 The ResearchDataGov portal is a joint project between the 
Census Bureau and the University of Michigan,<www.icpsr.umich.edu 
/web/pages/appfed/index.html>. 

26 U.S. Census Bureau, Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, 

Apply for Access,<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ces/data 
/restricted-use-data/apply-for-access.html>. 

Information about how to apply for FSRDC access is 
available on the Census Bureau’s Web site.28

Combining ACS Data With 
Administrative Data

Researchers at federal agencies with approved FSRDC 
projects can link individual or housing unit records 
from the ACS with administrative records based on 
personal identifiers. For example, Census Bureau staff 
linked the records of children in the ACS with records 
from the Internal Revenue Service, Department of 
Housing and Urban Development, Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services, Department of Health and 
Human Services, and other sources to investigate the 
undercount of young children in the decennial cen-
sus.29 ACS records were linked to administrative data 
using protected identification keys—anonymous identi-
fiers that can be used to link records across different 
data sets.

The Census Bureau conducts a variety of research 
projects that combine administrative records and 
survey data to lower costs, increase efficiency, reduce 
respondent burden, and improve data quality. Some 
of these projects generate new social and economic 
statistics—such as the Small Area Income and Poverty 
Estimates Program.30 Other projects investigate ways 
to use linked data to better measure family relation-
ships, evaluate program participation, and improve 
coverage of hard-to-reach populations.31

More information is available through the FSRDC Web 
site.32

28 U.S. Census Bureau, Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, 

Apply for Access, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ces/data 
/restricted-use-data/apply-for-access.html>. 

29 Leticia Fernandez, Rachel Shattuck, and James Noon, “The Use 

of Administrative Records and the American Community Survey to 
Study the Characteristics of Undercounted Young Children in the 2010 
Census,” CARRA Working Paper Series, CARRA-WP-2018-05, 2018.

30 U.S. Census Bureau, Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates 
(SAIPE) Program, <www.census.gov/programs- surveys/saipe.html>.

31 Amy O’Hara, Rachel M. Shattuck, and Robert M. Goerge, “Linking 

Federal Surveys with Administrative Data to Improve Research on 
Families,” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science, Volume 669, Issue 1, 2016, pp. 63–74.

27 U.S. Census Bureau, Privacy & Confidentiality, <www.census.gov 

32 U.S. Census Bureau, Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, 

/history/www/reference/privacy_confidentiality/>. 

<www.census.gov/fsrdc>.

12   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
12   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau6. CASE STUDIES USING ACS DATA

Case Study 1: Community Resilience Indicators 

Skill Level: Novice/Intermediate 
Subject: Assessing county characteristics that contribute to disaster resilience 
Type of Analysis: Analysis of American Community Survey (ACS) indicators at the county level 
Tools Used: Data.census.gov, mapping software

As disasters continue to increase in frequency and cost, researchers have attempted to identify and quan-
tify features that make communities more resilient to disasters. The Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA) National Integration Center (NIC) Technical Assistance (TA) Branch asked Argonne National Laboratory 
(Argonne) to review this body of research and provide a data-driven approach to prioritize locations for TA. 
FEMA included project management, research support, peer-to-peer learning, in-person and distance learning, 
coaching from subject-matter experts, and other topics as factors to be considered during the review.33

Most of the data for this analysis came from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2013–2017 ACS 5-year estimates. The pri-
mary advantage of using the ACS 5-year estimates is the increased statistical reliability compared with the ACS 
1-year estimates, especially for small geographic areas and small population subgroups. The 5-year data also 
enabled Argonne to display maps that included estimates for every county in the country.

Methods

Argonne’s first step was to conduct a literature review to identify previous methods used to assess community 
resilience. Argonne focused on county-level analyses that involved multiple hazards, had a predisaster focus, used 
quantitative measures, and incorporated publicly available data and methods.

Based on this review, Argonne selected 20 key indicators for their analysis, including 11 population-focused mea-
sures and 9 community-focused measures:

Population-Focused Indicators

•  Educational Attainment

•  Unemployment Rate

•  Disability

•  English Language Proficiency

•  Home Ownership

•  Mobility

•  Age

•  Household Income

• 

Income Inequality

•  Health Insurance

•  Single-Parent Household

Community-Focused Indicators

•  Connection to Civic and Social Organizations

•  Hospital Capacity

•  Medical Professional Capacity

•  Affiliation With a Religion

•  Presence of Mobile Homes

33 U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency and Argonne National Laboratory, “Community Resilience Indicator Analysis: County-Level 

Analysis of Commonly Used Indicators From Peer-Reviewed Research,” 2019, <www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-11/fema_community 
-resilience-indicator-analysis.pdf>, 2020 update.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   13 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   13

U.S. Census Bureau•

•

•

•

Public School Capacity

Population Change

Hotel/Motel Capacity

Rental Property Capacity

The percentage of people with disabilities was identified as one of the 20 key indicators of disaster resilience. 
Here are steps to access disability estimates for every county in the country (including Puerto Rico):

Navigate to <https://data.census.gov> and type “disability” into the search bar. Then click “Search”  
(see Figure 6.1).

Figure 6.1. Searching for Disability Tables in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov <https://data.census.gov>.

14   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
14   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauClick on the first table on the results page: Table S1810: “Disability Characteristics” (see Figure 6.2).

Figure 6.2. Selecting a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   15 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   15

U.S. Census BureauThis will bring you to a preview of Table S1810 with the United States as the default geography. Select “Customize 
Table” in the upper right corner (see Figure 6.3).

Figure 6.3. Previewing and Customizing a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov <https://data.census.gov>.

To access data for all counties in the United States, first select the “Geographies” filter (see Figure 6.4).

Figure 6.4. Selecting Geographic Areas Using the Geography Filter in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov <https://data.census.gov>.

16   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
16   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauNext:

•  Select “County.”

•  Then check the box for “All counties in United States.” This selection will appear at the bottom of the page 

next to “Selected Filters:”

•  Click “Close” in the lower right corner (see Figure 6.5).

Figure 6.5. Selecting All Counties in the United States in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov <https://data.census.gov>.

This table is too large to display in the preview window, so select “Download Table” (see Figure 6.6).

Figure 6.6. Downloading a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   17 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   17

U.S. Census Bureau 
For this case study, select the 2017 ACS 5-year data. After checking that the other default download specifica-
tions in the “Download/Print/Share” window are correct, select “Download” again (see Figure 6.7).

Figure 6.7. Using the Download/Print/Share Window in Data.census.gov







The indicator, lower levels of English Language Proficiency, is positively correlated with
Unemployment Rate (r = 0.50), lower levels of Educational Attainment (r = 0.43), and lower levels of
Mobility (r = 0.34).

The indicator Mobility (lack of access to a vehicle) is positively correlated with Unemployment Rate
(r = 0.50) and Single-Parent Households (r = 0.50). It is negatively correlated with Home Ownership
(r = −0.39).

The indicator Age (adults over 65) is positively correlated with Home Ownership (r = 0.46) and
Disability (r = 0.41).

 Counties where the indicator Income Inequality is higher may also see a population with a greater

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov <https://data.census.gov>.

number of Single-Parent Households (r = 0.47), higher levels of Unemployment (r = 0.42), and lower
levels of Mobility (r = 0.39). These counties may also have lower levels of Household Income
(r = −0.43).

Select “Download Now” after the file is prepared (see Figure 6.8).

Figure 6.8. Downloading a Compressed (ZIP) File in Data.census.gov





The indicator denoting lack of Health Insurance is positively correlated with lower levels of
Educational Attainment (r = 0.48) and Presence of Mobile Homes (r = 0.40). It is negatively correlated
with Medical Professional Capacity (r = −0.42).

The indicator Single-Parent Households is positively correlated with higher levels of Unemployment
Rate (r = 0.59), lower levels of Mobility (r = 0.50), and Educational Attainment (r = 0.46). It is
negatively correlated with Household Income (r = −0.54) and Home Ownership (r = −0.35).



The indicator Presence of Mobile Homes is positively correlated with Disability (r = 0.48),
Educational Attainment (r = 0.46), and lack of Health Insurance (r = 0.40). It is negatively correlated
with Household Income (r = −0.42) and Medical Professional Capacity (r = −0.40).

County-level Maps
The research team created national choropleth maps (Figure 1–Figure 20), with every county shaded based on 
a five-color scale (Table 2). The scale uses cooler colors to indicate potentially higher relative levels of 
resilience, with blue at the top of the scale followed by green, and warmer colors to indicate potentially lower 
relative levels of resilience, with yellow in the middle of the scale, followed by orange, and red at the bottom. 
Gray-colored counties indicate that no data were available for that indicator within the dataset used for that 
indicator. These maps show areas of the country that have high or low relative data points for that specific 
indicator.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov <https://data.census.gov>.

This download yields a compressed folder with three 
files: metadata, data, and table title. These data can be 
used to access the percentage of the population with a 
disability in each U.S. county. The research team cre-
ated county-level choropleth maps for each key indica-
tor. Counties were shaded based on a five-color scale 
(see Figure 6.9). The scale used cooler colors to indicate 
potentially higher relative levels of resilience, with blue 
at the top of the scale, and warmer colors to indicate 
potentially lower relative levels of resilience, with red at 
the bottom.

Figure 6.9. Color Scale for Choropleth Maps

Table 2. Color Scale for Choropleth Maps

Blue

Green

Yellow

Orange 

Red

Potentially high 
disaster resilience

Potentially low 
disaster resilience

Source: U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency and 
Argonne National Laboratory, Community Resilience Indicator 
Analysis, <www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-11/fema 
_community-resilience-indicator-analysis.pdf>, 2020 update.

18   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
18   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

CRIA 2019 

11

U.S. Census BureauFigure 6.10 shows a sample map of disaster resilience based on disability rates. The map shows relatively 
high concentrations of disability in parts of Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Mississippi, New Mexico, Oklahoma, 
Oregon, Tennessee, Puerto Rico, and West Virginia.

Figure 6.10. Percentage of the Population With a Disability by County

Source: U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency and Argonne National Laboratory, Community Resilience Indicator Analysis,  
<www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-11/fema_community-resilience-indicator-analysis.pdf>, 2020 update.

Figure 3. Disability: Percent of the Population with a Disability

2019

Data Source: ACS 2013–2017 five-year estimates, Table S1810

Binning Method: Jenks-Caspall Breaks

National Average: 12.6 percent of the U.S. population has a disability.

Findings: 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   19 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   19







States with the highest concentrations of counties having more than 21.1 percent of the population 
with a disability include Arkansas (49% of counties), West Virginia (42%), Kentucky (37%), and 

New Mexico (33%).

States where more than half their counties report 17.4 percent or more of their populations with a 

disability include Arkansas (85% of counties), West Virginia, (78%), Tennessee (74%), Kentucky 

(72%), Mississippi (65%), Alabama (60%), New Mexico (58%), Oklahoma (56%), and Oregon 

(53%). 

21.1 percent or greater.

Forty-three of 78 counties in Puerto Rico reported populations with disabilities at a rate of 

CRIA 2019 

15

U.S. Census BureauAggregated Commonly Used Community Resilience Indicator

The research team developed a process to aggregate the county-level data from all 20 commonly used

community resilience indicators to produce a choropleth map that shows relative resilience by county. The 

process to create this final aggregated-data map included four steps:   

1. The team oriented all of the datasets in the same direction (a higher number represents higher 

resilience) by reversing the data for the indicators that were negatively correlated to resilience 

(i.e., where higher numbers equaled less resilience). 22

2. The research team then converted each county’s data point to a standardized score value based on how 

many standard deviations above or below the indicator’s national mean it was. For example, Laramie 

County in Wyoming has a standardized score value for the indicator, median Household Income, of 

approximately 1.0, which means that this county’s median income of $62,879 is almost exactly one 

standard deviation higher than the national average median income of $48,995. For datasets where 

data for a specific county were missing, the mean for that indicator was used to ensure that the 

aggregate value for the country was not increased or reduced by the missing data. Appendix F 

provides the national mean for each indicator.  

3. The team then averaged the 20 standardized score values for each county to create an aggregated 

indicator by county. Because there is no validated weighting scheme for resilience indicators, the 

research team did not weight individual indicators in developing the aggregated indicator.

4. Finally, the team sorted the county-level aggregated indicator into five bins (Table 3). The research 

team used the same color scale for the aggregated-data map (Figure 21) as for the individual indicator 
maps (Figure 1–Figure 20), with blue indicating higher relative resilience levels and red indicating 
lower relative resilience levels. Inclusion in the blue bin indicates that the county was far above the 
national average (at least 1 standard deviation above the average). The next (green) bin indicates that 
Next, the research team developed a method to aggregate county-level data from all 20 indicators and sort each 
U.S. county into one of five bins. The research team used the same color scale for the aggregate maps as for the 
the county fell within 1 standard deviation above the average. The yellow bin indicates that the county 
individual indicator maps, with blue indicating higher relative resilience levels and red indicating lower relative 
fell below, but very near the average (within 0.5 standard deviation). The orange bin indicates that the 
resilience levels (see Figure 6.11). This aggregate map provides a data-driven basis for identifying areas where 
county fell between 0.5 and 1 standard deviation below the average, and the final (red) bin indicates
FEMA should offer community resilience Collaborative TA.
that the county fell at least 1 standard deviation below the average. 

Figure 6.11. Color Scale for Aggregated Resilience Indicators Map

Table 3: Color Scale for Aggregate Data Map

Blue

Green

Yellow

Orange 

Red

+1 standard deviation or more 
above the average

Above 0 but <+1.0 standard 
deviation above average
Below 0, but >−0.5 standard 
deviation below average
Between −0.5 and −1.0 standard 
deviation below average
−1.0 standard deviation or more 
below the average

Source: U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency and Argonne National Laboratory, Community Resilience Indicator Analysis,  
<www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-11/fema_community-resilience-indicator-analysis.pdf>, 2020 update.

Using these aggregated data, Argonne created an “Aggregated Commonly Used Community Resilience 
Indicators” choropleth map (see Figure 6.12). This analysis identified 96 counties in the lowest bin that are fac-
22  Indicators were changed to “% population under 65,” “% with HS diploma,” “% without a disability,” “% speaking English 
ing the greatest challenges to resilience, with 63 of these counties in Puerto Rico. A total of 309 counties sorted 
fluently,” “% with health insurance,” “% own a vehicle,” “% employed.” “% non-single family HH,” “% housing not mobile 
into the next bin. Many counties in this category are also within Puerto Rico, while others are primarily within the 
homes,” “reverse Gini index,” and “population stability.”
southeast and southwest regions of the United States and in Alaska.

CRIA 2019 

33

20   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
20   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau                                                        
Figure 6.12. Aggregated Commonly Used Resilience Indicators

Source: U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency and Argonne National Laboratory, Community Resilience Indicator Analysis,  
<www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-11/fema_community-resilience-indicator-analysis.pdf>, 2020 update.

Figure 21. Aggregated Commonly Used Community Resilience Indicators

2019

Although this analysis was conducted for the FEMA NIC TA Branch, the findings have relevance for many FEMA 
program areas, as well as for state, local, territorial, and tribal emergency managers and other partners. By 
reviewing county data for these 20 indicators, emergency managers can gain insights for targeted outreach 
strategies and for adapting emergency operations plans to community characteristics.

All of the maps and data can be found within an interactive map viewer on FEMA’s geospatial portal at  
<www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-11/fema_community-resilience-indicator-analysis.pdf>, 2020 update.

CRIA 2019 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   21 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   21
34

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #2: Exploring Social Determinants of Health Using ACS-CMS Linked Data

Skill Level: Intermediate/Advanced 
Subject: Social determinants of health 
Type of Analysis: Linking administrative data to American Community Survey (ACS) data  
Tools Used: Data.census.gov, Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse, spreadsheet, statistical software 
Authors: Shondelle Wilson-Frederick, Statistician, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; and Sharon R. Ennis, 
Statistician, Department of Veterans Affairs

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) is an operating division within the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services. CMS oversees the two largest federal health care programs—Medicare and 
Medicaid—as well as the Children’s Health Insurance Program and the exchanges. CMS programs will touch the 
lives of over 145 million beneficiaries and consumers in FY 2020.34 

The CMS Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse (CCW) is a research database designed to make Medicare, 
Medicaid, Assessments, and Part D Prescription Drug Event data more readily available to support research 
designed to improve the quality of care and reduce costs and utilization.35 The Medicare Master Beneficiary 
Summary File (MBSF), which is stored in the CCW, includes Medicare enrollment status, demographic, and eligi-
bility information for all beneficiaries. 

While the MBSF can be used to study racial, ethnic, and geographic disparities among Medicare Fee-for-Service 
(FFS) beneficiaries, data on the social determinants of health are limited. The MBSF contains individual level 
characteristics; however, it does not include any personal identifiable information. The American Community 
Survey (ACS) is a rich source of demographic, socioeconomic, and housing estimates that can be combined 
with claims data by linking at the geographical level of ZIP codes to enhance our understanding of Medicare FFS 
beneficiaries. This aggregated linked file can be analyzed to learn more about the social determinants of health 
among Medicare FFS beneficiaries. 

This case study summarizes the steps to compile and analyze data for one of the key ACS variables—language 
spoken at home. Communication and language barriers are associated with structural and clinical challenges and 
poorer health outcomes.36 Limited English proficiency may contribute to a lower quality of care, patient satisfac-
tion, post-care adherence, patient safety, and lack of equity in the provision of healthcare.37 

34  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Fiscal Year 2020: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Justification of Estimates for 

Appropriations Committees, <www.cms.gov/files/document/fy2020-cms-congressional-justification-estimates-appropriations-committees.pdf>. 

35 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, “Chronic Conditions Warehouse,” <https://www2.ccwdata.org/web/guest/home/>.
36 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Office of Minority Health, “Building an Organizational Response to Health Disparities: Guide to 

Developing a Language Access Plan,” <www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency-Information/OMH/Downloads/Language-Access-Plan-508.pdf>.

37 Kimberly Proctor, Shondelle M. Wilson-Frederick, and Samuel C. Haffer, “The Limited English Proficient Population: Describing Medicare, 

Medicaid, and Dual Beneficiaries,” Health Equity, 2(1): 82–89, Baltimore, MD, 2018.

22   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
22   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauTo access ACS data on language spoken at home:

We start by navigating to <https://data.census.gov>. Since we already know which table we would like to 
access, we type C16001 into the search bar and click the first result C16001: “Language Spoken at Home for the 
Population 5 Years and Over” (See Figure 6.13).

Figure 6.13. Searching for a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Select the desired survey year by clicking on the current “Product” selection. For the purposes of this case 
study, we are using 2012–2016 ACS 5-year estimates. The product selection should read “2016 ACS 5-Year 
Estimates Detailed Tables” (see Figure 6.14). Data.census.gov automatically defaults geography to the national 
level unless otherwise specified. Since we would like to study Medicare beneficiaries across ZIP Code Tabulation 
Areas (ZCTAs), we click on “Geos” to view the geography filters. ZCTAs are generalized areal representations of 
United States Postal Service ZIP code service areas.

Figure 6.14. Changing the Data Product Year and Selecting Geographic Areas Using the Geography Filter in  
                  Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   23 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   23

U.S. Census BureauNext:

•  Turn on the “Show Summary Levels” toggle switch. 

•  Select “860 – 5-Digit ZCTA.”

•  Check the box for “All ZCTAs in the United States.” This selection will appear at the bottom of the page next 

to “Selected Geographies.”

•  Click “Close” in the bottom right corner (see Figure 6.15).

Figure 6.15. Selecting All ZCTAs in the United States in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

24   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
24   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauTypically, the table would update to show the geographies selected. However, since there are over 33,000 
ZCTAs in the United States, the table is too large to display. Therefore, we need to select “Download Table” 
(See Figure 6.16). 

Figure 6.16. Downloading a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

For this case study, we select the 2016 ACS 5-year data. After making sure that the download specifications in 
the “Download/Print/Share” window are correct, we select “Download” again (see Figure 6.17).

Figure 6.17. Using the Download/Print/Share Window in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   25 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   25

U.S. Census BureauSelect “Download Now” after the file is prepared (see Figure 6.18).

Figure 6.18. Downloading a Compressed (ZIP) File in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

A compressed folder that includes three files; metadata, data, and table title will be available. We, generally, can 
use these data to combine beneficiary data with ACS data by ZCTA. To complete the analysis, we:

•  Upload the ACS data to the CCW.

• 

Import the data as statistical software data sets.

•  Recode the ACS variables and create percentages.

•  Merge individual ACS data sets by ZCTA and sort by ZCTA.

•  Merge Medicare beneficiary health information by a CMS unique identifier.

•  Sort Medicare beneficiary data sets by ZCTA.

•  Link the ACS and Medicare by ZCTA/ZIP code. 

•  Omit all unmatched ZCTA/ZIP codes pairs or ZIP codes with less 10,000 ZIP codes.

26   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
26   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFindings/Summary of Case Study on Using ACS Data

The combined ACS/MBSF results show that compared to all beneficiaries, a higher percentage of White and 
Black Medicare beneficiaries resided in communities with a higher mean English-only speaking population, rela-
tive to Asian, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and Hispanic beneficiaries (see Figure 6.19). By linking the 
MBSF to the ACS, it was possible to examine the language needs for Medicare beneficiaries. This analysis would 
not have been possible by using the MBSF only. 

Figure 6.19. Percentage of Medicare Beneficiaries in ZIP Codes That Speak English Only (Mean)

Note: A/NHOPI = Asian/Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander. AIAN = American Indian/Alaska Native. 
Source: Authors’ analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey; and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

CMS provides free publicly accessible resources in 18 languages to help people make informed health care 
decisions and be active partners in their health care and the health care of their families.38 Additionally, the 
CMS Office of Minority Health has designed several initiatives to eliminate disparities in health care quality and 
access, so that all CMS beneficiaries can achieve their highest level of health.39 To learn more about CMS’ equity 
resources to assist with understanding the communication needs of diverse populations of Medicare beneficia-
ries, please visit <www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency-Information/OMH/research-and-data/information-products 
/issue-briefs>.

Linking the MBSF with the ACS strengthened the utility of CMS administrative data to explore how social deter-
minants of health may contribute to racial, ethnic, and geographic disparities. These study findings highlight the 
diversity of the Medicare population and supports identification of appropriate targets to develop effective inter-
ventions aimed at promoting equity for all Americans.

38 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, “Resources by Language,” <www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency-Information/OMH/resource-center 

/resources-by-language>.

39 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, “Equity Initiatives,” <www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency-Information/OMH/equity-initiatives>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   27 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   27

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #3: Learning More About HUD-Assisted Households Through Data 
Linkage

Skill Level: Advanced 
Subject: Analyzing characteristics of households receiving U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 
rental assistance with American Community Survey (ACS) data 
Type of Analysis: Administrative record linkage and analysis using ACS data  
Tool Used: Statistical software 
Authors: Shawn Bucholtz, Federal Housing Finance Agency (formerly U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development); Emily Molfino, U.S. Census Bureau; and Quentin Brummet, National Opinion Research Center 
(NORC) at the University of Chicago 

The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) administers several rental assistance programs 
that help low-income households afford their rental units, including those housing seniors, disabled persons, 
and veterans. The largest of these programs is the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program with approximately 
2.3 million households receiving rental assistance. The second largest of these programs is project-based rental 
assistance (PBRA) with approximately 1.3 million households receiving rental assistance, while the third largest 
program, Public Housing (PH), currently provides housing for approximately 950,000 households. These three 
programs, as well as a myriad of much smaller HUD programs, provide rental assistance for more than 4.6 million 
households, or about 3.8 percent of all households in the United States. 

To administer rental assistance programs in a manner consistent with statutory, regulatory, and program-specific 
requirements, HUD must collect information from the beneficiaries. However, like many federal programs, HUD’s 
data collection is generally limited only to the information necessary to implement the program. This short-
coming limits HUD’s ability to fully monitor ongoing program performance or evaluate longer-term program 
effects. As a result, evaluating program effects often requires additional surveys, which are expensive.   

This shortcoming in the ability to evaluate programmatic impact is also well known to policymakers and mem-
bers of research and advocacy communities. It is partially addressed by the Foundations for Evidence-Based 
Policymaking Act of 2019, which requires agencies to develop written evaluation plans and establish evaluation 
officers. One promising method for low-cost evaluation of program performance and effects is linking adminis-
trative records to data from existing surveys, like the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS). 
The ACS contains a wealth of household and demographic information that is not currently collected by HUD 
including:

•  Type of occupation and commuting mode.

•  Veteran status.

•  Health insurance status.

•  Expanded racial categories and household relationship types.

• 

Internet access.

Linking ACS data to HUD-assisted housing units and households allows HUD to gain insights that would other-
wise not be possible with current rental assistance administrative records, potentially leading to more robust 
program evaluation. For example, the HUD/ACS linked data set can be used to create summary statistics of char-
acteristics of the HUD-assisted housing units or households present in the ACS sample, such as the percentage of 
HUD-assisted housing units that have high-speed Internet—a characteristic available in the ACS.

In this case study, we describe how we linked HUD–assisted housing unit and household administrative records to 
ACS housing unit records to identify ACS households receiving HUD rental assistance.

Access to the ACS/HUD linked data is available to researchers through a Federal Statistical Research Data 
Center, after obtaining Special Sworn Status and approval for their project.40 

40 U.S. Census Bureau, Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, <www.census.gov/fsrdc>. 

28   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
28   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauRecord Linkage Process

HUD-assisted housing units were first linked to ACS housing units based on housing unit addresses using the 
Census Bureau’s Master Address File (MAF), which is the source of addresses for the ACS, other Census Bureau 
demographic surveys, and the decennial census. Then, HUD-assisted housing units were linked to ACS units if a 
household member (person) within the ACS household roster matched a person in a HUD-assisted household 
roster. We refer to this roster-based linking process as “Protected Identification Key (PIK) matching.” Any ACS 
housing unit that linked to a HUD administrative record by either a MAF match or PIK match was considered a 
HUD-assisted housing unit. A complete description of the record linkage process, as well as potential problems 
with the linkage process, is available in Bucholtz, Molfino, and Brummet’s technical report.41

Record Linkage Quality Assessment 

Table 6.1 shows the number of ACS records linked to a HUD administrative record by the type of link. Although 
not the subject of this article, we speculate that the downward trend in the total number of ACS records linked to 
a HUD administrative record reflects a general downward trend in response rates for HUD-assisted households.
The authors have observed a similar trend in another household survey, the American Housing Survey.42 

  Table 6.1. Breakdown of HUD/ACS Links Made by Address (MAF) and Person (PIK)

Breakdown

Year

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

MAF-matched 

PIO-matched

Count . . . . . . . . . .

60,000

63,500

55,500

58,000

57,000

54,500

51,500

Percent . . . . . . . . .

81.6

81.9

82.2

82.9

82.6

83.8

84.4

Count . . . . . . . . . .

13,500

14,000

12,000

12,000

12,000

10,500

9,500

Percent . . . . . . . . .

18.4

18.1

17.8

17.1

17.4

16.2

15.6

Total

Count . . . . . . . . . .

73,500

77,500

67,500

70,000

69,000

65,000

61,000

Notes: MAF = Master Address File. PIK = Protected Identification Key. Numbers are rounded to comply with U.S. Census Bureau disclosure 
guidelines.
Source: Authors’ analysis of American Community Survey (ACS) and U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) data.

To determine whether the linking process performed well, we compared the “prelinking” count of HUD rental 
assistance administrative records with the “post-linking” ACS weighted estimate of ACS housing units identified 
as HUD-assisted. All else being equal, if the linking process performs well, the post-link ACS weighted estimate of 
HUD-assisted units should be very similar to the prelink known record count.

Table 6.2 below presents linking quality metrics for 2015 through 2017. The table shows that HUD provided the 
Census Bureau with 4.74 million rental assistance administrative records and housing unit records in 2017. When 
these records were linked to ACS housing units, the weighted estimate of HUD-assisted housing units was 4.62 
million, or 97.3 percent of the real total. Across all years of the data linkage (2011–2017), the ACS-weighted 
estimate of HUD-assisted housing units ranges from 97.0 to 99.4 percent. There is some variation in linkage rate 
across the three categories of HUD programs, however, with the PBRA program consistently performing worse 
than PH or HCV. Reasons for this difference are explored in the technical report, but are generally due to varia-
tions in the quality of HUD addresses.

41 Shawn Bucholtz, Emily Molfino, and Quentin Brummet, “Identifying Subsidized Housing Units Within the American Community Survey 
Through Administrative Record Linkage: A Technical Report,” U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC, 2020, 
<www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/Identifying-Subsidized-Housing-Units.html>. 

42 Based on unpublished analysis of 2015, 2017, and 2019 American Housing Survey internal use files.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   29 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   29

U.S. Census BureauGiven the results in Table 6.2, it’s reasonable to conclude that the linking process performed well enough to 
ensure that the ACS housing units flagged as HUD-assisted units are a representative cross-section of all pos-
sible ACS housing units that are truly HUD-assisted units. In statistical terms, although there are false negatives 
(positives), they appear to be limited in quantity, and we feel their omission (inclusion) should not result in biased 
estimates of housing or household characteristics of HUD-assisted households. Regardless of the extent to which 
our linking process introduced any bias, a method for overcoming this bias is described in the technical report.43 

  Table 6.2. Results of HUD/ACS Administrative Linking

All

PH

HCV

PBRA

2015

2016

2017

HUD records provided to Census . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACS estimate of HUD-assisted households . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACS estimate as share of HUD records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACS 90 percent margin of error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

HUD records provided to Census . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACS estimate of HUD-assisted households . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACS estimate as share of HUD records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACS 90 percent margin of error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

HUD records provided to Census . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACS estimate of HUD-assisted households . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACS estimate as share of HUD records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACS 90 percent margin of error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4,757,000
4,678,000
98.3%
0.7%

4,760,000
4,623,000
97.1%
0.7%

4,744,000
4,615,000
97.3%
0.80%

998,200
1,021,000
102.3%
1.4%

1,014,000
1,001,000
98.7%
1.5%

977,100
979,700
100.3%
1.50%

2,265,000
2,256,000
99.6%
1.2%

2,300,000
2,248,000
97.7%
1.1%

2,313,000
2,268,000
98.1%
1.10%

1,494,000
1,400,000
93.7%
1.3%

1,446,000
1,374,000
95.0%
1.1%

1,453,000
1,367,000
94.1%
1.30%

Note: ACS = American Community Survey. HCV = Housing Choice Voucher program. PBRA = project-based rental assistance. PH = public 
housing.
Source: Authors’ analysis of American Community Survey (ACS) and U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) data.

Uses of the Linked Data

In this section, we illustrate two uses of the linked data to produce estimates that are otherwise not feasible to 
derive using HUD rental assistance administrative records alone.

On HUD forms 50058 and 50059, current and prospective HUD-assisted renters supply a host of demographic 
information including age, sex, race, and ethnicity. Consistent with federal guidelines governing the collection 
of race and ethnicity data, HUD collects race information using five standard categories: White, Black or African 
American, Asian, American Indian or Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. ACS follows 
the same federal guidelines but expands the number of categories for Asians from one to six detailed Asian race 
categories and offers respondents a write-in option.44

The linked HUD/ACS data can be used to estimate the number of HUD-assisted householders reporting their race 
as Asian by detailed Asian race category. Table 6.3 presents these results from the 2013–2017 ACS 5-year data. 
The results reveal significant variation within the Asian race groups in the share of households receiving HUD 
assistance relative to those eligible for HUD assistance. While it is beyond the scope of this case study to explain 
these differences further, this analysis illustrates the potential value of the data linkage for better understanding 
who is served by HUD rental assistance programs.

43 Shawn Bucholtz, Emily Molfino, and Quentin Brummet, “Identifying Subsidized Housing Units Within the American Community Survey 
Through Administrative Record Linkage: A Technical Report,” U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC, 2020, 
<www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/Identifying-Subsidized-Housing-Units.html>. 

44 At the time of this analysis, the ACS questionnaire included write-in fields for “Other Asian,” “Other Pacific Islander,” and “Some other race.” 

Starting with the 2020 ACS questionnaire, there are now write-in fields for “White” and “Black or African American.” For more information, see 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology/questionnaire-archive.html>. 

30   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
30   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau Table 6.3. Detailed Asian Race for HUD-Assisted Households: 2013–2017

Householder race

Asian Indian  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cambodian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chinese  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Filipino . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hmong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japanese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Korean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Laotian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Other Asian or Two Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Vietnamese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

HUD-assisted  
households

5,973
5,480
53,810
12,340
4,515
3,117
24,000
2,289
9,879
32,370

  Source: Authors’ analysis of 2013–2017 American Community Survey, 5-Year Estimates.

Households  
eligible  
for HUD  
assistance

Share of eligible  
households receiving 
 HUD assistance  
(in percent)

105,533
16,640
259,710
82,330
14,389
34,187
116,480
9,847
116,379
89,910

6
33
21
15
31
9
21
23
8
36

As another example, HUD and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) partner to implement the VA 
Supportive Housing (VASH) program, which provides housing vouchers to homeless veterans. As of 2017, the 
HUD-VASH program provided housing to nearly 88,000 households with a veteran.45 HUD leaders long sus-
pected that other HUD rental assistance programs provided housing to many additional veterans that were not 
part of the VASH program. As is the case with detailed race and ethnicity data, however, HUD forms 50058 and 
50059 do not collect information on veteran’s status.

The linked HUD/ACS data can be used to estimate the number of HUD-assisted households with a veteran to 
inform this program. Table 6.4 below presents these results by year from the ACS 1-year estimates for 2011 
through 2017. The results reveal that HUD is serving between 285,000 and 324,000 households with a veteran.

 Table 6.4. Number of HUD-Assisted Households With  
                  Veterans by Year: 2011–2017

Year

2011 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

HUD-assisted  
households  
with a veteran

302,000
314,200
289,900
288,200
286,000
285,600
291,900

Source: Author’s analysis of 2011–2017 American Community Surveys, 1-Year 
Estimates.

Conclusion

Using a multifaceted approach, we have linked administrative data from HUD’s rental housing assistance pro-
grams to ACS housing units for years 2011 through 2017. In each year of the ACS, we identify 61,000 to 78,000 
ACS households as being HUD-assisted. Our analysis of the data linkage quality suggests that false-positive links 
and false-negative links are minimal, enabling high-quality analysis of the linked data. By linking the two data 
sources, we can learn more about HUD-assisted households without having to conduct an expensive, one-off 
survey. In the future, this work will continue, and we plan to link HUD administrative records to future years of the 
ACS as they become available.

Our goal with this project was to develop the linkage process and build the linked data sets so researchers at 
HUD and elsewhere can further explore the data. 

45 Ann Elizabeth Montgomery and Meagan Cusack, “HUD-VASH Exit Study: Final Report,” U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 

Development, Washington, DC, 2017, <www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/HUD-VASH-Exit-Study.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   31 
What Federal Agencies Need to Know   31

U.S. Census Bureau7. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

U.S. Census Bureau, What Is the American Community 
Survey? 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/about.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, Geography and ACS  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography 
-acs.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data 
Users Need to Know 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/handbooks/general.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 
2014 Content Review 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/operations 
-and-administration/2014-content-review.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, Questions on the Form and Why 
We Ask 
<www.census.gov/acs/www/about/why-we-ask-each 
-question/>

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Handbook of Questions and 
Current Federal Uses 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/operations 
-and-administration/2014-content-review/federal 
-uses.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, Library, Uses of Census Bureau 
Data in Federal Funds Distribution 
<www.census.gov/library/working-papers/2017 
/decennial/census-data-federal-funds.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Releases 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data 
-releases.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Tables and Tools  
<www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables 
-and-tools/>

U.S. Census Bureau, Census Business Builder (CBB)  
<www.census.gov/data/data-tools/cbb.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, Data.census.gov Resources 
<www.census.gov/data/what-is-data-census-gov.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, State Data Center (SDC) Program  
<www.census.gov/about/partners/sdc.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 
(ACS), Custom Tables 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/custom 
-tables.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, Federal Statistical Research Data 
Centers 
<www.census.gov/fsrdc>

U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies 
(CES), Apply for Access 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ces/data 
/restricted-use-data/apply-for-access.html>

ACS Online Community 
<https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/>

32   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
32   What Federal Agencies Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau