An ofﬁcial website of the United States government Here’s how you know

(cid:0)

   BACK TO TOPICS PAGE [/ACS/WWW/ABOUT/WHY-WE-ASK-EACH-QUES…

We ask questions about a person's difﬁculty with speciﬁc daily

tasks to create statistics about disability.

Local, state, tribal, and federal agencies use disability data to

plan and fund programs for people with disabilities. Disability

data are also used to evaluate other government programs and

policies to ensure that they fairly and equitably serve the needs

of all groups, as well as enforce laws, regulations, and policies

against discrimination.

Your privacy concerns

We use your conﬁdential survey answers to create statistics like those in the results below and in the full tables that contain all th

data—no one is able to ﬁgure out your survey answers from the statistics we produce. The Census Bureau is legally bound to

strict conﬁdentiality requirements. Individual records are not shared with anyone, including federal agencies and law enforcemen

entities. By law, the Census Bureau cannot share respondents' answers with anyone, including companies, other federal agenci

and law enforcement.

Questions as they appear on the form

We ask three questions about disability to identify limitations in basic areas of functioning and
independent living.

Results from these questions

We compile the results from these questions to provide communities with important statistics to help in their disability services
planning. You can see some of these published statistics here for the nation, states, and your community.

United States

Percent with a Disability

13.0 percent [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP02]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates
Data Proﬁles/Social Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP02]

Percent 65 Years and Over with a Disability

32.9 percent [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP02]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates
Data Proﬁles/Social Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP02]

Median Earnings of Persons with a Disability

31,436 dollars [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDT5Y2023.B18140]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates
Detailed Tables: B18140 [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDT5Y2023.B18140]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

Disability data help communities:

Provide Adequate Housing

We ask about disability of household members to understand whether available housing meets the needs of residents in local

communities. When housing is not sufﬁcient or not affordable, disability data help communities:

Enroll eligible households in programs designed to assist them.
Qualify for grants from the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program, the HOME Investment Partnership Program, the

Emergency Solutions Grants (ESG) Program, the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA) Program, and other local and federa
programs.

Provide Health Care to Children and Families

We ask about disability status, income, and health insurance status to help communities enroll eligible families in programs

designed to assist them such as:

Marketplace
Medicaid
the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP)

Community disability data are also used to ensure that these programs are adequately serving eligible families.

Ensure Equal Opportunity

We ask about disability status to help governments and communities enforce laws, regulations, and policies against discriminatio

on the basis of disability status. For example, disability data determine whether there are health care or public health program
disparities on the basis of disability status (Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000).

Provide Assistance to People with Disabilities

We ask about disability to help local ofﬁcials provide programs and services that:

Enable older adults to remain living safely in their homes and communities (Older Americans Act).
Provide services and assistance to people with a disability, such as financial assistance with utilities (Low Income Home Energy Assistance

Program).

Understand Changes

We ask about disability and other topics to inform researchers, advocacy groups, and policymakers on whether people with

disabilities have the same opportunities in education, employment, voting, and home ownership. Communities use data on the
prevalence of various types of disabilities to ensure that they can meet needs during weather events, disasters, and public healt

emergencies.

History of disability questions

Disability questions originated with the 1830 Census. The current questions were added to the ACS in 2008.

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

[https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

