2023 American Community Survey/Puerto Rico Community 
Survey Group Quarters Definitions


Group Quarters 

A group quarters is a place where people live or stay, in a group living arrangement, that is owned 
or managed by an entity or organization providing housing and/or services for the residents.  This is 
not a typical household-type living arrangement.  These services may include custodial or medical 
care as well as other types of assistance, and residency is commonly restricted to those receiving 
these services.  People living in group quarters are usually not related to each other.  

Group quarters include such places as college residence halls, residential treatment centers, skilled 
nursing facilities, group homes, military barracks, correctional facilities, and workers’ dormitories.

1. Correctional Facilities for Adults

Correctional Residential Facilities 

These are community-based facilities operated for correctional purposes.  The 
facility residents may be allowed extensive contact with the community, such as for employment or 
attending school, but are obligated to occupy the premises at night. 

Examples are halfway houses, restitution centers, and prerelease, work release, and study centers. 

Federal Detention Centers 

Stand alone, generally multi-level, federally operated correctional facilities that provide Ashort-term@ 
confinement or custody of adults pending adjudication or sentencing.  These facilities may hold 
pretrial detainees, holdovers, sentenced offenders, and Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) inmates, formerly called Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) inmates.  These 
facilities include: Metropolitan Correctional Centers (MCCs), Metropolitan Detention Centers 
(MDCs), Federal Detention Centers (FDCs), Bureau of Indian Affairs Detention Centers, ICE 
Service Processing Centers, and ICE contract detention facilities. 

1

 
 


Federal and State Prisons 

Adult correctional facilities where people convicted of crimes serve their sentences.  Common 
names include: prison, penitentiary, correctional institution, federal or state correctional facility, and 
conservation camp.  The prisons are classified by two types of control: (1) “federal” (operated by or 
for the Bureau of Prisons of the Department of Justice) and (2) “state.”  Residents who are forensic 
patients or criminally insane are classified on the basis of where they resided at the time of 
interview.  Patients in hospitals (units, wings, or floors) operated by or for federal or state 
correctional authorities are interviewed in the prison population.  Other forensic patients will be 
interviewed in psychiatric hospital units and floors for long-term non-acute patients.  This category 
may include privately operated correctional facilities. 

Local Jails and Other Municipal Confinement Facilities 

Correctional facilities operated by or for counties, cities, and American Indian and Alaska Native 
tribal governments.  These facilities hold adults detained pending adjudication and/or people 
committed after adjudication.  This category also includes work farms and camps used to hold 
people awaiting trial or serving time on relatively  short sentences.  Residents who are forensic 
patients or criminally insane are classified on the basis of where they resided at the time of 
interview.  Patients in hospitals (units, wings, or floors) operated by or for local correctional 
authorities are counted in the jail population.  Other forensic patients will be interviewed in 
psychiatric hospital units and floors for long-term non-acute patients.  This category may include 
privately operated correctional facilities. 

Military Disciplinary Barracks and Jails 

Correctional facilities managed by the military to hold those awaiting trial or convicted of crimes. 

2 

2.

 Juvenile Facilities

Correctional Facilities Intended for Juveniles 

Includes specialized facilities that provide strict confinement for its residents and detain juveniles 
awaiting adjudication, commitment or placement, and/or those being held for diagnosis or 
classification.  Also included are correctional facilities where residents are permitted contact with 
the community, for purposes such as attending school or holding a job. 

Examples are residential training schools and farms, reception and diagnostic centers, group homes 
operated by or for correctional authorities, detention centers, and boot camps for juvenile 
delinquents. 

Group Homes for Juveniles (non-correctional) 

Includes community-based group living arrangements for youth in residential settings that are able 
to accommodate three or more clients of a service provider.  The group home provides room and 
board and services, including behavioral, psychological, or social programs.  Generally, clients are 
not related to the care giver or to each other. 

Examples are maternity homes for unwed mothers, orphanages, and homes for abused and neglected 
children in need of services.  Group homes for juveniles do not include residential treatment centers 
for juveniles or group homes operated by or for correctional authorities. 

Residential Treatment Centers for Juveniles (non-correctional) 

Includes facilities that primarily serve  youth that provide services  on-site in a highly structured live-
in environment for the treatment of drug/alcohol abuse, mental illness, and emotional/behavioral 
disorders.  These facilities are staffed 24-hours  a day.  The focus of a residential treatment center is 
on the treatment program.  Residential treatment centers for juveniles do not include facilities 
operated by or for correctional authorities. 

3

 
3. Nursing Facilities/Skilled Nursing Facilities

Nursing Facilities/Skilled-Nursing Facilities 

Includes facilities licensed to provide medical care with seven day, twenty-four hour coverage for 
people requiring long-term non-acute care.  People in these facilities require nursing care, regardless 
of age.  Either of these types of facilities may be referred to as nursing homes.

4. Other Health Care Facilities

Hospitals with Patients Who Have No Usual Home Elsewhere 

Includes hospitals if they have any patients who have no exit or disposition plan, or who are known 
as "boarder patients" or "boarder babies."  All hospitals are eligible for inclusion in this category 
except psychiatric hospitals, units, wings or floors operated by federal, state or local correctional 
authorities.  Patients in hospitals operated by these correctional authorities will be interviewed in the 
prison or jail population.  Psychiatric units and hospice units in hospitals are also excluded.  Only 
patients with no usual home elsewhere are interviewed in this category. 

In-Patient Hospice Facilities 

Includes in-patient hospice facilities (both free-standing and units in hospitals) that provide 
palliative, comfort, and supportive care for the terminally ill patient and their families.  All patients 
in these GQs are included in the ACS GQ sample. 

Mental (Psychiatric) Hospitals and Psychiatric Units in Other Hospitals 

Includes psychiatric hospitals, units and floors for long-term non-acute care patients.  The primary 
function of the hospital, unit, or floor is to provide diagnostic and treatment services for long-term 
non-acute patients who have psychiatric-related illness. 

Military Treatment Facilities with Assigned Patients 

These facilities include military hospitals and medical centers with active duty patients assigned to 
the facility.  Only these patients are interviewed in this category. 

4

 
 
Residential Schools for People with Disabilities


Includes schools that provide the teaching of skills for daily living, education programs, and care for 
students with disabilities in a live-in environment. 

Examples are residential schools for the physically or developmentally disabled.

5. College/University Student Housing

College/University Student Housing 

Includes residence halls, and other buildings, including apartment-style student housing, designed 
primarily to house college and university students in a group living arrangement either on or off 
campus.  These facilities are owned, leased, or managed either by a college, university, or 
seminary, or by a private entity or organization.  Fraternity and sorority housing recognized by the 
college or university are included as college student housing.

Students attending the U.S. Naval Academy, the U.S. Military Academy (West Point), the U.S. 
Coast Guard Academy, and the U.S. Air Force Academy are counted in military group quarters.

5 

   
	
6. Military Group Quarters

Military Quarters 

These facilities include military personnel living in barracks (including “open” barrack transient 
quarters) and dormitories and military ships.  Patients assigned to Military Treatment Facilities and 
people being held in military disciplinary barracks and jails are not interviewed in this category.  
Patients in Military Treatment Facilities with no usual home elsewhere are not interviewed in this 
category.

7. Other Noninstitutional Facilities

Emergency and Transitional Shelters (with Sleeping Facilities) for People Experiencing 
Homelessness 

Facilities where people experiencing homelessness stay overnight.  These include: 
1) shelters that operate on a first-come, first-serve basis where people must leave in the morning and
have no guaranteed bed for the next night;
2) shelters where people know that they have a bed for a specified period of time (even if they leave
the building every day); and
3) shelters that provide temporary shelter during extremely cold weather (such as churches).  This
category does not include shelters that operate only in the event of a natural disaster.

Examples are emergency and transitional shelters; missions; hotels and motels 
used to shelter people experiencing homelessness; shelters for children who are runaways, neglected 
or experiencing homelessness; and similar places known to have people experiencing homelessness. 

6

 
   
Group Homes Intended for Adults 

Group homes are community-based group living arrangements in residential settings  that are able to 
accommodate three or more clients of a service provider.  The group home provides room and board 
and services, including behavioral, psychological, or social programs.  Generally, clients are not 
related to the care giver or to each other. Group homes do not include residential treatment centers 
or facilities operated by or for correctional authorities. 

Residential Treatment Centers for Adults 

Residential facilities that provide treatment on-site in a highly structured live-in environment for the 
treatment of drug/alcohol abuse, mental illness, and emotional/behavioral disorders.  They are 
staffed 24-hours a day.  The focus of a residential treatment center is on the treatment program. 
Residential treatment centers do not include facilities  operated by or for correctional authorities. 

Religious Group Quarters 

These are living quarters owned or operated by religious organizations that are intended to house their 
members in a group living situation.  This category includes such places as convents, monasteries, and 
abbeys. 

Living quarters for students living or staying in seminaries are classified as college student housing not 
religious group quarters. 

Workers’ Group Living Quarters and Job Corps Centers 

Includes facilities such as dormitories, bunkhouses, and similar types of group living arrangements 
for agricultural and non-agricultural workers.  This category also includes facilities that provide a 
full-time, year-round residential program offering a vocational training and employment program 
that helps young people 16-to-24 years old learn a trade, earn a high school diploma or GED and get 
help finding a job. 

Examples are group living quarters at migratory farm worker camps, construction workers’ camps, 
Job Corps centers, and vocational training facilities, and energy enclaves in Alaska. 

7 

