U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS

Bureau of Labor Statistics

Consumer Price Index Data

Research

Consumer Price Index

Search Consume Go

CPI Home

CPI Publications

CPI Data

CPI Methods

About CPI

Contact CPI

R-CPI-U-RS Homepage
Background
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has made numerous improvements to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) over the past several decades. While these
improvements make the present and future CPI more accurate, historical price index series are not adjusted to reflect the improvements. Many researchers,

however, expressed an interest in having a historical research series that was measured consistently over the entire period. Accordingly, the Consumer Price Index

retroactive series using current methods (R-CPI-U-RS) presents an estimate of the CPI for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U) from 1978 to the present that incorporates,

when possible, most of the improvements made over that time span into the entire series.

The primary users of the R-CPI-U-RS data are researchers that use it as a valuable proxy of a historical estimate of inflation using current methods. In addition, the

Census Bureau currently makes use of the index to adjust some of its income measures for changes in the cost of living. The direct adjustment of individual CPI

index series makes this the most detailed and systematic estimate available of a consistent CPI series. This measure attempts to answer the question, “What would

have been the measured rate of inflation from 1978 forward had the methods currently used in calculating the CPI-U been in use since 1978?”

It is important to recognize that the R-CPI-U-RS provides an annual inflation series that adjusts for specific changes in BLS methodology. The R-CPI-U-RS is of use to

forecasters and other researchers in analyzing the trends and other movements in consumer inflation over the last few decades. The measure should help answer

the question of the degree to which the measured rate of inflation has been affected by some of the improvements BLS has made.

Limitations

The R-CPI-U-RS has some limitations. First, most estimates are based on BLS research covering a short period of time and extrapolated to a longer period.

Therefore, there is uncertainty surrounding the magnitude of the adjustments. Second, there have been several improvements in the CPI not incorporated into the

R-CPI-U-RS, either because they do not represent changes in methodology, because they had negligible impacts on the CPI’s growth rate, or because it was
impossible to systematically estimate the impacts of the new methods in past years. Examples include changes in imputation methods, improvements in methods for

pricing hospital services, and some changes in quality adjustment procedures, such as for wireless telephone services. A list of the changes incorporated in the R-

CPI-U-RS is available in an online table.

Available data

The R-CPI-U-RS presents an estimate of the CPI for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U) from 1978 to the present that incorporates most of the improvements made over

that time span into the entire series. Note that many of the improvements occurred prior to 2000 and the monthly percent change in the R-CPI-U-RS is very similar

to the published CPI-U for years after 2001; many of the differences prior to 1999, however, are substantial, reflecting major methodological changes such as the

switch to a rental equivalence approach for shelter in 1983 and the adoption of a geometric means formula in 1999. Monthly data are published once a year in
March.

Data
Updated R-CPI-U-RS, All items, 1977-2024 (XLSX)

Updated R-CPI-U-RS, All items less food and energy, 1977-2024 (XLSX)
Related articles
Additional information, including more details on how the series is calculated, is available in the CPI research series using current methods, 1978-98 Monthly Labor

Review article. (Note that the table of improvements on Exhibit 1 in the article only goes through 1999; for more recent improvements refer to the online table

mentioned above.)

Last Modified Date: March 21, 2025

U.S. BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS  Consumer Price Index   Office of Prices and Living Conditions   Suitland Federal Center   Floor 7   4600 Silver Hill Road   Washington,
DC 20212-0002

Telephone: 202-691-7000  www.bls.gov/CPI   Contact CPI

