An ofﬁcial website of the United States government Here’s how you know

(cid:0)

   BACK TO TOPICS PAGE [/ACS/WWW/ABOUT/WHY-WE-ASK-EACH-QUES…

We ask a question about a person's race to create statistics

about race and to present other estimates by race groups.

Local, state, tribal, and federal programs use these data, and

they are critical factors in the basic research behind numerous

policies, particularly for civil rights. Race data are used in

planning and funding government programs that provide funds

or services for speciﬁc groups.

These data are also used to evaluate government programs and policies to ensure that they fairly and

equitably serve the needs of all racial groups and to monitor compliance with antidiscrimination laws,

regulations, and policies.

The U.S. Census Bureau collects racial data in accordance with the 1997 Ofﬁce of Management and Budget

standards on race and ethnicity. The data on race are based on self-identiﬁcation and the categories on the

form generally reﬂect a social deﬁnition of race. The categories are not an attempt to deﬁne race

biologically, anthropologically, or genetically. Respondents can mark more than one race on the form to
indicate their racial mixture.

Your privacy concerns

We use your conﬁdential survey answers to create statistics like those in the results below and in the full tables that contain all th
data—no one is able to ﬁgure out your survey answers from the statistics we produce. The Census Bureau is legally bound to

strict conﬁdentiality requirements. Individual records are not shared with anyone, including federal agencies and law enforcemen
entities. By law, the Census Bureau cannot share respondents' answers with anyone, including companies, other federal agenci
and law enforcement.

Question as it appears on the form

We ask one question about a person's race to better understand demographic characteristics.

(cid:0)

   VIEW QUESTIONS

Results from this question

We compile the results from this question to provide communities with important statistics about race and to present other
estimates by race group. You can see some of these published statistics here for the nation, states, and your community.

United States

Percent of Total Population: One Race

89.3 percent [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates
Data Proﬁles/Demographic Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Percent of Total Population: Two or More Races

10.7 percent [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates

Data Proﬁles/Demographic Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

Race data help communities:

Ensure Equal Opportunity

We ask about the race of community members in combination with information about housing, voting, language, employment, an

education, to help governments and communities enforce antidiscrimination laws, regulations, and policies. For example, race

data are used to:

Establish and evaluate the guidelines for federal affirmative action plans under the Federal Equal Opportunity Recruitment Program.
Monitor compliance with the Voting Rights Act and enforce bilingual election requirements.
Monitor and enforce equal employment opportunities under the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Identify segments of the population who may not be getting needed medical services under the Public Health Service Act.
Allocate funds to school districts for bilingual services under the Bilingual Education Act.

Understand Change

Researchers, advocacy groups, and policymakers are interested in knowing if people of different races have the same

opportunities in education, employment, voting, and home ownership.

The National Science Foundation uses these data to provide information on people of different racial backgrounds in the science

and engineering workforce.

Several federal agencies use these data to investigate whether housing or transportation improvements have unintended

consequences for specific race groups.

Data on race are used with age and language data to address language and cultural diversity needs in health care plans for the

older population.

Administer Programs for Specific Groups

Communities, including tribal governments, ensure that programs are operating as intended by knowing how many
people are eligible to participate in certain programs. For example, the Indian Housing Block Grant program, Indian

Community Development Block Grant program, and Indian Health Service all depend on accurate estimates of
American Indians and Alaska Natives. Data for this population come from the questions about a person's race.

History of race question

The question about a person's race originated with the 1790 Census. It was added to the ACS in 2005 when it replaced the

decennial census long form.

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

[https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

