Understanding and Using  
Puerto Rico Community Survey Data
What All Data Users Need to Know

Issued April 2020

Acknowledgments

Linda A. Jacobsen, Vice President, U.S. Programs, Population Reference 
Bureau (PRB), Mark Mather, Associate Vice President, U.S. Programs, PRB, 
and Kelvin Pollard, Senior Demographer, U.S. Programs, PRB, drafted 
this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau’s American 
Community Survey Office. Other PRB staff who assisted in drafting and 
reviewing the handbook include Paola Scommegna and Lillian Kilduff. 

American Community Survey data users who provided feedback and case 
studies for this handbook include Caridad Arroyo, José Caraballo Cueto, 
and Alberto Velázquez.

Nicole Scanniello, Gretchen Gooding, and Caleb Hopler, Census Bureau, 
contributed to the planning and review of this handbook.  

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of   
Albert E. Fontenot Jr., Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs, 
James B. Treat, Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs, and 
Donna M. Daily, Chief, American Community Survey Office.

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the review and 
release of these handbooks include Sirius Fuller, Justin Keller, David Raglin, 
Michael Ratcliffe, Dameka Reese, Michael Starsinic, Janice Valdisera, and 
Brian Wilson.

Faye Brock, Linda Chen, Christine Geter, and Amanda Perry provided 
publication management, graphic design and composition, and editorial 
review for print and electronic media under the direction of Janet Sweeney, 
Chief of the Graphic and Editorial Services Branch, Public Information Office.

Understanding and Using  
Puerto Rico Community Survey Data
What All Data Users Need to Know

Issued April 2020

U.S. Department of Commerce 
Wilbur Ross, 
Secretary

Karen Dunn Kelley,  
Deputy Secretary 

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau,  
Understanding and Using  
Puerto Rico Community Survey Data: 
What All Data Users Need to Know, 
U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC, 2020.

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Ron Jarmin, 
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer

Albert E. Fontenot Jr., 
Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs

James B. Treat, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office

Contents

1. Understanding the PRCS: The Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

2. How Is the PRCS Different From the ACS? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

3. Geographic Areas Covered in the PRCS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

4. Accessing PRCS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

5. Case Studies Using PRCS Data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

6. Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   iii 
What All Data Users Need to Know    iii

U.S. Census Bureau 
This page is intentionally blank.

UNDERSTANDING AND USING PUERTO RICO 
COMMUNITY SURVEY DATA: WHAT ALL DATA 
USERS NEED TO KNOW

Suppose a mayor wants to know if a job training 
initiative has reduced the level of unemployment in a 
municipio. A business owner in San Juan wants infor-
mation about the changing characteristics of workers 
and their commuting patterns. A public health agency 
is interested in identifying vulnerable populations that 
may need evacuation assistance during an emergency. 
Where could they go for this information?

The U.S. Census Bureau’s Puerto Rico Community 
Survey (PRCS) is designed to meet the needs of 
policymakers, business leaders, planners, and oth-
ers who need good data to make informed decisions. 
The PRCS is part of the Census Bureau’s American 
Community Survey (ACS) program, providing a 
detailed portrait of the social, economic, housing, and 
demographic characteristics of communities through-
out Puerto Rico. 

This guide provides an overview of what data users 
need to know about working with PRCS data— 
particularly how the PRCS differs from the ACS and 
the major geographic areas for which PRCS data are 
available. It also includes some recent case studies that 
show how PRCS data are being used to help address 
important policy and program issues in Puerto Rico. 

What Is the American Community 
Survey?

The ACS is a nationwide survey designed to provide 
communities with reliable and timely social, economic, 
housing, and demographic data every year. The U.S. 
Census Bureau uses data collected in the ACS to pro-
vide estimates on a broad range of population, housing 
unit, and household characteristics for states, coun-
ties, cities, American Indian and Alaska Native areas, 
tribal subdivision areas, school districts, congressional 
districts, census tracts, block groups, and many other 
geographic areas.    

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 3.5 million 
addresses, with survey information collected nearly 
every day of the year. Data are pooled across a calen-
dar year to produce estimates for that year. As a result, 
ACS estimates reflect data that have been collected 
over a period of time rather than for a single point in 
time as in the decennial census, which is conducted 
every 10 years and provides population counts as of 
April 1 of the census year.

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been col-
lected over a 12-month period and are available for 
geographic areas with at least 65,000 people. Starting 
with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is also produc-
ing “1-year Supplemental Estimates”—simplified ver-
sions of popular ACS tables—for geographic areas with 
at least 20,000 people. The Census Bureau combines 
5 consecutive years of ACS data to produce multiyear 
estimates for geographic areas with fewer than 65,000 
residents. These 5-year estimates represent data col-
lected over a period of 60 months. 

For more detailed information about the ACS—how 
to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, understand-
ing multiyear estimates, knowing which geographic 
areas are covered in the ACS, and how to access ACS 
data on the Census Bureau’s Web site—see the Census 
Bureau’s handbook on Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users 
Need to Know.1 

1 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American  
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   1 
What All Data Users Need to Know    1

U.S. Census Bureau1. UNDERSTANDING THE PRCS: THE BASICS

What Is the Puerto Rico Community 
Survey?

The U.S. Census Bureau first conducted the Puerto 
Rico Community Survey (PRCS) in 2005—the same 
year the American Community Survey (ACS) was 
implemented for the 50 states and the District of 
Columbia. The 2005 PRCS covered the household 
population and was expanded to cover the full popu-
lation (including people living in group quarters such 
as college dormitories) the following year. In 2010, the 
PRCS, like the ACS, replaced the decennial census long 
form as the nation’s source of social and economic 
data for population and housing characteristics. The 
Census Bureau uses data collected in the PRCS to pro-
vide estimates for Puerto Rico, municipios, neighbor-
hoods, and many other geographic areas. 

The PRCS has an annual sample size of about 36,000 
addresses. Because the PRCS is based on a sample, 
rather than all housing units and people, PRCS esti-
mates have a degree of uncertainty, called sampling 
error, associated with them. In general, the larger the 
sample, the smaller the level of sampling error. To help 

users understand the impact of sampling error on data 
reliability, the Census Bureau provides a “margin of 
error” for each published PRCS estimate. The margin 
of error, combined with the PRCS estimate, gives users 
a range of values within which the actual, “real-world” 
value is likely to fall. 

TIP: In general, data users should be careful in draw-
ing conclusions about small differences between two 
PRCS estimates because they may not be statistically 
different. 

For more information about margins of error in the 
PRCS—and determining statistical significance—see 
the Census Bureau’s Accuracy of the Data documenta-
tion for PRCS multiyear and 1-year estimates.2  

Users also should note that the PRCS was designed to 
provide estimates of the characteristics of the popula-
tion, not to provide counts of the population in differ-
ent geographic areas or population subgroups. For 

2 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Code 

Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/technical-documentation/code-lists.html>.

  Table 1.1.  Population and Housing Data Included in Puerto Rico Community Survey

Social Characteristics
Ancestry
Citizenship Status
Disability Status1
Educational Attainment
Fertility
Grandparents as Caregivers
Language Spoken at Home
Marital History2
Marital Status
Migration/Residence 1 Year Ago
Period of Military Service
Place of Birth
School Enrollment
Undergraduate Field of  

Degree3

Veteran Status2
Year of Entry

Economic Characteristics
Class of Worker
Commuting (Journey to Work)
Employment Status
Food Stamps/Supplemental 

Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP)4

Health Insurance Coverage2
Income and Earnings
Industry and Occupation
Place of Work
Poverty Status
Work Status Last Year

Housing Characteristics
Computer and Internet Use5
House Heating Fuel
Kitchen Facilities
Occupancy/Vacancy Status
Occupants Per Room

Plumbing Facilities6
Rent
Rooms/Bedrooms
Selected Monthly Owner Costs
Telephone Service Available
Tenure (Owner/Renter)
Units in Structure
Value of Home
Vehicles Available
Year Householder Moved Into 

Unit

Year Structure Built

Demographics Characteristics
Age and Sex
Group Quarters Population
Hispanic or Latino Origin
Race
Relationship to Householder
Total Population

1 Questions on Disability Status were significantly revised in the 2008 survey to cause a break in series. 
2 Marital History, Veterans’ Service-Connected Disability Status and Ratings, and Health Insurance Coverage were added in the 2008 survey. 
3 Undergraduate Field of Degree was added in the 2009 survey. 
4 Food Stamp Benefit amount was removed in 2008. In Puerto Rico, the SNAP Program is called the Nutritional Assistance Program.
5 Computer and Internet Use was added to the 2013 survey. 
6 One of the components of Plumbing Facilities, flush toilet, and Business or Medical Office on Property questions were removed in 2016.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 

2   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
2   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureauand occupations, educational attainment, veterans, 
homeownership, and many other topics. Because data 
collection is ongoing, the PRCS also provides essential, 
up-to-date information about population and housing 
characteristics both before and after natural disasters 
(like hurricanes) or economic shifts, like the recession 
in Puerto Rico that began in 2006.5  

Here are some examples of how PRCS data are being 
used for reporting and decision-making:

•  The daily newspaper El Nuevo Día used PRCS data 
to show that Puerto Rico had experienced net out-
migration of 67,000 people to the U.S. mainland in 
2016.6

•  The Youth Development Institute of Puerto Rico 
(Instituto para el Desarrollo de la Juventud) uses 
PRCS data for several of the indicators it uses 
to monitor child and family well-being in the 
Commonwealth and its municipios, including child 
poverty, single-parent family status, and access to 
health insurance.7

•  The Center for Puerto Rican Studies at Hunter 

College, City University of New York, used PRCS 
data to project the number of people who may 
migrate from Puerto Rico to the United States 
in the wake of Hurricane Maria, as well as which 
states are likely to feel the greatest impact.8

•  The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 

Development used PRCS data to analyze aspects 
of the housing market in Puerto Rico, including the 
share of homeowners living in single-family homes 
and median rental costs.9

basic counts of Puerto Rico’s population by age, sex, 
race, and Hispanic origin, visit the Census Bureau’s 
Population and Housing Unit Estimates Web page.3   

The content collected through the PRCS can be 
grouped into four main types of characteristics: social, 
economic, housing, and demographic (see Table 1.1). 
Various tables in the ACS/PRCS have different “uni-
verses,” or base reference totals against which all 
other characteristics are compared. Some tables cover 
population characteristics, while others cover housing 
characteristics. Among the population tables, some 
cover the entire population (such as tables of the 
population by age), while some cover only a subset of 
the population (such as tables on employment status, 
which include data only for the population aged 16 and 
older).

PRCS and ACS content is designed to meet the needs 
of federal government agencies, and every question on 
the survey is asked for a reason. For example, ques-
tions about how people get to work and the length 
of their commutes are used for planning emergency 
response routes and improvements to roads, highways, 
rail lines, and bus routes. The responsibility of the 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the 
Paperwork Reduction Act requires that new questions 
demonstrate the practical utility of the data and mini-
mize “respondent burden.” Respondent burden can 
be defined in different ways, but is often related to the 
length of the interview or questionnaire, or the extent 
to which questions are viewed as being intrusive or too 
personal. Because participation in the PRCS and ACS 
is mandatory, the OMB will only approve necessary 
questions for inclusion on the surveys.

Some people are reluctant to respond to the PRCS 
because of concerns about the confidentiality of the 
data. However, strict confidentiality laws protect all 
PRCS and ACS information that could be used to iden-
tify individuals or households under Title 13 of the  
U.S. Code.4 This is true even for interagency commu-
nication; other government agencies do not have the 
legal right to access individuals’ confidential informa-
tion from the PRCS or the ACS. 

Who Uses the PRCS?

The PRCS provides vital information on a yearly basis 
about Puerto Rico and its people, in order to help 
local officials, community leaders, businesses, and the 
public plan and make decisions based on the changes 
taking place in their communities. Through the PRCS, 
we know more about demographic trends, jobs 

3 U.S. Census Bureau, Population and Housing Unit Estimates, 

<www.census.gov/popest/>. 

4 U.S. Census Bureau, Title 13, U.S. Code—Protection of Confidential  

Information, <www.census.gov/history/www/reference/privacy 
_confidentiality/title_13_us_code.html>. 

5 Mary Williams Walsh, “How Puerto Rico Is Grappling With a Debt 

Crisis,” New York Times (May 16, 2017), <www.nytimes.com 
/interactive/2017/business/dealbook/puerto-rico-debt-bankruptcy 
.html>. 

6 “Unas 67,000 personas en la isla emigraron a Estados Unidos en 

2016,” El Nuevo Dia (September 14, 2017), <www.elnuevodia.com 
/noticias/locales/nota/unas67000personasenlaislaemigraro-
naestadosunidosen2016-2357680/>.

7 Instituto para el Desarrollo de la Juventud, <http://juventudpr.org 

/en/data/statistics/>.

8 Center for Puerto Rican Studies (Centro), Hunter College, CUNY, 
“Estimates of Post-Hurricane Maria Exodus from Puerto Rico,” Centro 
RB2017-01 (October 2017), <https://centropr.hunter.cuny.edu/sites 
/default/files/RB2017-01-POST-MARIA%20EXODUS_V3.pdf>.

9 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of 

Policy Development and Research, (September 1, 2017),  
“Comprehensive Housing Market Analysis” for Puerto Rico,”  
<www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/pdf/PuertoRico-comp.pdf>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   3 
What All Data Users Need to Know    3

U.S. Census Bureau2. HOW IS THE PRCS DIFFERENT FROM THE ACS? 

The data collected in the Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS) are similar to those collected in the American 
Community Survey (ACS) for the 50 states and the District of Columbia, but there are also some important dif-
ferences between the two surveys. 

With the ACS, the initial mailings sent to U.S. addresses are printed in English and residents can receive Spanish-
language materials upon request. By comparison, Puerto Rico addresses initially receive PRCS mailings that are 
printed in Spanish, although residents can request English-language materials. English and Spanish versions of 
sample PRCS questionnaires are available on the U.S. Census Bureau’s Web site.10  

The PRCS form includes several questions that are modified from those on the ACS to account for cultural and 
geographic differences between Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland.11 For example, Question 4 in the Housing 
section asks the amount of land that a house, apartment, or mobile home occupies. Whereas the acre is the unit 
of measurement in the ACS, the cuerda (or “Spanish acre,” equal to .971 acres) is the measurement unit in the 
PRCS (see Figure 2.1).12   

Figure 2.1.  ACS and PRCS Questions on Property Size  

2016 ACS Questionnaire 

   2016 PRCS Questionnaire 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 ACS and PRCS Questionnaires, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/questionnaire-archive.2016.html>.

While the ACS asks if respondents have “hot and cold running water,” the PRCS asks if they have “running water” 
and “a water heater,” as it is less common to have hot water heaters in Puerto Rico (see Figure 2.2).

Figure 2.2.  ACS and PRCS Questions on Plumbing, Kitchen Facilities, and Telephone Service  

2016 ACS Questionnaire 

    2016 PRCS Questionnaire 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 ACS and PRCS Questionnaires, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/questionnaire-archive.2016.html>.

10 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Questionnaire Archive, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 

/questionnaire-archive.html>. 

11 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Design and Methodology Report (January 2014), p. 56, <https://www2.census.gov 

/programs-surveys/acs/methodology/design_and_methodology/acs_design_methodology_report_2014.pdf>. 

12 U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 ACS and PRCS Questionnaires, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology/questionnaire-archive.2016 

.html>. 

4   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
4   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
In the ACS, Question 14 asks whether anyone in the household received benefits through the Food Stamp 
Program or Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) (see Figure 2.3). Puerto Rico operates a 
“Nutritional Assistance Program” in place of SNAP, and eligibility requirements and benefit amounts are deter-
mined by Puerto Rico, rather than the federal government.

Figure 2.3.  ACS and PRCS Questions on Nutrition Assistance Program Benefits  

2016 ACS Questionnaire 

            2016 PRCS Questionnaire 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 ACS and PRCS Questionnaires, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/questionnaire-archive.2016.html>.

Figure 2.4 shows additional PRCS modifications to the questions on birthplace (nativity), citizenship, and year 
of entry. For these questions, the differences are in the geographic areas emphasized in the question wording or 
response options. For example, the “year of entry” question in the ACS asks when a respondent came to live in 
the United States. In the PRCS, that same question asks when someone came to live in Puerto Rico.

Figure 2.4.  ACS and PRCS Questions on Place of Birth, Citizenship, and Year of Entry  

2016 ACS Questionnaire 

    2016 PRCS Questionnaire 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 ACS and PRCS Questionnaires, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/questionnaire-archive.2016.html>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   5 
What All Data Users Need to Know    5

U.S. Census Bureau 
Similarly, questions on migration and place of residence 1 year ago differ slightly between the two surveys (see 
Figure 2.5). 

Figure 2.5.  ACS and PRCS Questions on Migration/Residence 1 Year Ago  

2016 ACS Questionnaire 

    2016 PRCS Questionnaire 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 ACS and PRCS Questionnaires, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/questionnaire-archive.2016.html>.

6   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
6   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
The “place of work” question in the ACS asks the respondent to name the county and state of their work loca-
tion, while the same question in the PRCS asks the person to name the Puerto Rico municipio as the first option, 
while listing the U.S. county and state as an alternative (see Figure 2.6).13

Figure 2.6.  ACS and PRCS Questions on Place of Work  

2016 ACS Questionnaire 

    2016 PRCS Questionnaire 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 ACS and PRCS Questionnaires, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/questionnaire-archive.2016.html>.

13 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Questionnaire Archive, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 

/questionnaire-archive.html>. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   7 
What All Data Users Need to Know    7

U.S. Census Bureau 
There are also differences in the ACS and PRCS questions on the means of transportation to work. The ACS 
includes an option for “Streetcar or trolley car” while “Carro público,” or “public car” is included in the list of 
options in the PRCS (see Figure 2.7).

Figure 2.7.  ACS and PRCS Questions on Commuting  

2016 ACS Questionnaire 

             2016 PRCS Questionnaire 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 ACS and PRCS Questionnaires, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/questionnaire-archive.2016.html>.

Finally, Figure 2.8 shows a minor difference in the ACS and PRCS questions on class of worker. The ACS ques-
tionnaire includes “county” as an example of a local government employee, while the PRCS questionnaire refers 
to both “county” and “municipio” employees.

Figure 2.8.  ACS and PRCS Questions on Class of Worker 

2016 ACS Questionnaire 

                2016 PRCS Questionnaire 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 ACS and PRCS Questionnaires, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/questionnaire-archive.2016.html>.

8   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
8   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauDifferences in Data Collection Methods and Population Controls

Unlike the ACS, the PRCS does not have an Internet response option. As a result, the Census Bureau uses a differ-
ent mail strategy to encourage households to complete the PRCS. About 4 days before the initial mail package, 
addresses selected for the PRCS receive a prenotice letter, which addresses selected for the ACS do not receive. 
The initial mail package for the PRCS contains the full questionnaire, rather than an instruction card for complet-
ing the survey online, as is the case for the ACS mailing. In both cases, the replacement mail package for nonre-
spondents is sent approximately 3 weeks after the initial mailing. In addition, the Census Bureau sends only two 
reminder postcards for the PRCS, compared with three reminders for the ACS (two pressure seal letters and one 
postcard). 

As with most household surveys, the PRCS data are controlled so that the number of people in certain categories 
agree with the Census Bureau’s official estimates. The PRCS, like the ACS, uses a weighting method to ensure 
that estimates are consistent with official Census Bureau population control totals. However, there are minor dif-
ferences in the controls used in the ACS and the PRCS. ACS estimates are controlled to the Census Bureau’s July 
1 population estimate totals by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin, while PRCS estimates are controlled to popula-
tion estimates by age and sex only. Additionally, while both ACS and PRCS estimates are controlled to the popu-
lation at the county (or municipio) level, they are not controlled to the sub-county level in Puerto Rico—unlike in 
the 50 states and the District of Columbia.14  

Housing unit totals in the ACS are controlled to the Census Bureau’s mid-year totals, but there are currently 
no housing unit controls available for Puerto Rico.15 This is because the Census Bureau’s Population Estimates 
Program only produces July 1 housing unit estimates for the 50 states and the District of Columbia. 

More information about PRCS and ACS methods is available in the Census Bureau’s Design and Methodology 
Report.16 

14 Starting with the 2009 surveys, ACS estimates of the total population of incorporated places (self-governing cities, towns, or villages) and 

minor civil divisions (such as county precincts) are also adjusted so that they are consistent with official population estimates. 

15 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Design and Methodology Report (January 2014), pp. 153–154, <www.census.gov/programs 

-surveys/acs/methodology/design-and-methodology.html>. 

16 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Design and Methodology Report (January 2014), <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 

/acs/methodology/design-and-methodology.html>. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   9 
What All Data Users Need to Know    9

U.S. Census Bureau3. GEOGRAPHIC AREAS COVERED IN THE PRCS

Data from the Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS) are tabulated for a variety of geographic areas ranging 
from the Commonwealth to municipios, barrios, and subbarios. For reporting purposes, Puerto Rico (like the 
United States as a whole) is subdivided into two main types of geographic areas, legal and statistical. Municipios 
are the primary legal divisions of Puerto Rico. For data presentation purposes, the U.S. Census Bureau treats a 
municipio as the equivalent of a county in the United States.

The Census Bureau recognizes barrios and barrios-pueblo as the primary legal divisions of municipios. These 
entities are similar to the minor civil divisions used for reporting data in 29 states of the United States. Subbarios 
are subdivisions of barrios and barrios-pueblo.

Statistical areas in Puerto Rico are defined by the Census Bureau in partnership with officials in Puerto Rico and 
include areas like metropolitan and micropolitan statistical areas, urban areas, census tracts, and zonas urbanas. 
The primary purpose of statistical areas is to tabulate and present decennial census and ACS/PRCS data. An 
example of a statistical area is the San Juan-Carolina-Caguas Metropolitan Statistical Area. 

There are no incorporated places in Puerto Rico; instead, the Census Bureau provides data for two types of 
“census designated places”: zonas urbanas, representing the governmental center of each municipio, and comu-
nidades, representing other settlements. 

Figures 3.1 through 3.4 display sample maps of several key geographic areas available through the PRCS: 
municipios, Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs), comunidades, and census tracts.

There are 78 municipios in Puerto Rico, all of which are functioning governmental entities. PRCS 1-year estimates 
are currently available for 11 of Puerto Rico’s 78 municipios—those with populations of 65,000 or more in 2016 
(see Figure 3.1). Puerto Rico has 62 municipios with populations of at least 20,000 people that receive 1-year 
Supplemental Estimates. The 16 municipios in Puerto Rico with fewer than 20,000 people only receive 5-year 
estimates.

Figure 3.1.  Municipios in Puerto Rico by Availability of PRCS Estimates in 2016

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey data (2016, 2016 Supplemental, and 2012–2016),  
<https://data.census.gov>; and Geography, Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles—County, <www.census.gov 
/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.2016.html>. 

10   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
10   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauAs with each state, the Census Bureau works with the Puerto Rico State Data Center to divide Puerto Rico into a 
series of PUMAs with minimum populations of 100,000. PUMAs are constructed based on municipio and census 
tract boundaries. Typically, municipios with large populations are subdivided into multiple PUMAs, while PUMAs 
in more rural areas are made up of groups of adjacent municipios. PUMAs defined in Puerto Rico for the 2010 
Census and beyond nest within the boundaries of the 11 municipio-based planning regions used to tabulate and 
disseminate Economic Census data for Puerto Rico.

Puerto Rico’s PUMAs are shown below in Figure 3.2. 

Figure 3.2.  Public Use Microdata Areas in Puerto Rico

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Geography, Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles—Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs),  
<www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.2016.html>.

Puerto Rico also contains 253 census designated places, referred to as “comunidades” and “zonas urbanas.” As 
Figure 3.3 shows, 94 percent of these places have fewer than 20,000 people and thus will receive only 5-year 
estimates; in contrast, 1-year estimates are available for only six of these places.

Figure 3.3.  Comunidades in Puerto Rico by Availability of PRCS Estimates in 2016

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey data (2016, 2016 Supplemental, and 2012–2016),  
<https://data.census.gov>; and Geography, Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles—Places (Incorporated Places and Census 
Designated Places), <www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.2016 
.html>. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   11 
What All Data Users Need to Know    11

U.S. Census BureauCensus tracts—small subdivisions of counties that typically have between 1,200 and 8,000 residents, with an 
optimum population of 4,000,—are commonly used to present information for areas approximately the size of 
neighborhoods. Puerto Rico currently has 945 census tracts (see Figure 3.4).

Figure 3.4.  Census Tracts in Puerto Rico

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Geography, Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles—Census Tracts, <www.census.gov 
/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.2016.html>.

There are also more than 300 PRCS data tables available for block groups—subdivisions of census tracts—that 
include between 600 and 3,000 people each. In the PRCS, block groups are the lowest (smallest) level of geog-
raphy published. Block group data are only available in the PRCS 5-year data products.   

For more information about geographic areas covered by PRCS and ACS data, see the Census Bureau’s hand-
book on Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.17

17 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to 

Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

12   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
12   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau4. ACCESSING PRCS DATA

Data.census.gov is the U.S. Census Bureau’s primary tool for accessing population, housing, and economic data 
from the Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS), the American Community Survey (ACS), the decennial census, 
and many other Census Bureau data sets.18 Data.census.gov provides comprehensive access to pretabulated 
PRCS data for a wide range of geographic areas, including Puerto Rico, municipios, census designated places, 
census tracts, and block groups. 

Suppose, for example, we are interested in finding poverty estimates for Puerto Rico. 

•  Go to data.census.gov at <https://data.census.gov> and click on “Advanced Search” under the search bar 

(see Figure 4.1). This will bring you to the Advanced Search page.

Figure 4.1.  Selecting Advanced Search in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

TIP: Data users who want to access PRCS estimates through data.census.gov will not see “PRCS” or “Puerto 
Rico Community Survey” among the listed surveys. Rather, they can access PRCS estimates by using the geog-
raphy filter to select data for Puerto Rico. However, there are certain tables produced only for Puerto Rico, with 
names ending in “PR” such as “DP02PR.” For a complete list of ACS and PRCS tables, visit the Census Bureau’s 
Table Shells and Table List Web page at <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation 
/table-shells.html>.

18 Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   13 
What All Data Users Need to Know    13

U.S. Census Bureau•  Begin with the Geography filter. Select “Geography” in the navigation pane on the left side of the screen to 

display a list of available geographies.

•  Select “State” and then select “Puerto Rico” from the “State” filter (see Figure 4.2).

Figure 4.2.  Geography Filter Selection in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

14   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
14   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau•  Next, choose the “Surveys” filter and select “ACS 1-Year Estimates Subject Tables” (see Figure 4.3)

Figure 4.3.  Selecting a Survey in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   15 
What All Data Users Need to Know    15

U.S. Census Bureau•  For our example, choose the “Topics” filter and select “Income and Poverty,” “Poverty,” and “Poverty” again.

•  The three filters should appear in the “Selected Filters” at the bottom of the page. 

•  Next, click on “Search” in the lower right corner of the page (see Figure 4.4). 

Figure 4.4.  Searching for Topics in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

16   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
16   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau•  Click on Table S1701 “Poverty Status in the Past 12 Months” (see Figure 4.5).

Figure 4.5.  Choosing a Subject Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   17 
What All Data Users Need to Know    17

U.S. Census Bureau•  An online table showing poverty status for the population in Puerto Rico is displayed on the next screen. 

•  From this page, users can click on “Customize Table” if they want to modify the geography, survey, year, or 

topic (see Figure 4.6).

Figure 4.6.  Customizing a Table in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

18   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
18   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauOther Options for Accessing PRCS Data 

Data users with programming skills can use the ACS Summary File for Puerto Rico to download and analyze ACS 
data.19 The Summary File is useful for skilled programmers who want to access multiple ACS tables for large num-
bers of geographic areas. Similar to data.census.gov, data users who want to access PRCS estimates through the 
ACS Summary File will not see “PRCS” or “Puerto Rico Community Survey.” They can access PRCS estimates by 
selecting Puerto Rico as their geography. 

There are certain tables produced only for Puerto Rico with names ending in “PR” such as “B05001PR.” For a 
complete list of ACS and PRCS tables, visit the Census Bureau’s Table Shells and Table List Web page at  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/table-shells.html>.

TIP: The ACS Summary File is geared toward more advanced data users, so the Census Bureau recommends 
that users check to see if their tables of interest are easily available for download through data.census.gov 
before using this data product. 

The ACS Summary File can be downloaded as zipped files from the Census Bureau’s file transfer protocol (FTP) 
server.20 

Developers can also access PRCS data through the Census Bureau’s application programming interface (API).21  
The Census Data API provides an efficient way to get ACS, PRCS, and other data directly from the Census 
Bureau, without storing the data on a computer or a local server. If you know how to read the documentation 
and create a request, you can easily download variables and geographic areas of interest. Data are continuously 
available and regularly updated, so you have immediate access to new data as they are released. 

Data users interested in creating custom ACS estimates for Puerto Rico can access microdata records from the 
Census Bureau’s Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) files. Accessible through the Census Bureau’s Web site, 
the ACS PUMS files allow users to create their own estimates with variables of their choosing.22 Estimates created 
using the PUMS files may differ from published estimates available through data.census.gov because the PUMS 
files are a subset of the cases contained in the full ACS data.

TIP: Data users need to use statistical software, such as SPSS, SAS, R, or Stata, to process PUMS data, and the 
responsibility for producing estimates from PUMS and judging their statistical significance is up to the data 
user. 

Data users interested in learning more about accessing data from the PRCS are encouraged to refer to the 
section on “Accessing ACS Data” in the Census Bureau’s handbook on Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.23

19 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Summary File Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/summary-file 

.html>. 

20 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data via FTP, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/data-via-ftp.html>. 
21 U.S. Census Bureau, Developers, Available APIs, <www.census.gov/data/developers/data-sets.html>. 
22 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums.html>. 
23 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov 

/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   19 
What All Data Users Need to Know    19

U.S. Census Bureau5. CASE STUDIES USING PRCS DATA

Case Study #1: Analyzing Child Poverty Rates Across Municipios

Skill Level: Introductory/Intermediate 
Subject: Child poverty 
Type of Analysis: Analysis of  Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS) data across municipios in Puerto Rico 
Tools Used: Data.census.gov, spreadsheet 
Author: José Caraballo Cueto, Census Information Center, University of Puerto Rico

Dr. José Caraballo Cueto is the director of the Census Information Center (CIC) at the University of Puerto Rico 
(UPR) in Cayey. The CIC Program was established in 1988 through a joint agreement between the National Urban 
League and the U.S. Census Bureau to support the dissemination of census data to underserved communities. 

Since then, the CIC Network has become an official Census Bureau Program with a total of 59 organizations in 
22 states, including the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. The CIC at UPR in Cayey provides the university, 
and the 11 municipios it serves, technical training in the use of census data. For this case study, Dr. Cueto analyzes 
child poverty estimates in Puerto Rico across municipios, using Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS) data.

His first step is to select the appropriate PRCS data set. While single-year data are available for many municipios, 
he needs to use a 5-year ACS data set (for example, 2011–2015) if he wants data for every municipio in the 
Commonwealth. He also knows that there is uncertainty—margin of error—associated with all the PRCS esti-
mates, particularly for smaller geographic areas and small population groups. The 5-year estimates are more reli-
able than 1-year estimates because they are based on larger sample sizes.

Dr. Cueto starts his analysis by going to the data.census.gov Web site at <https://data.census.gov>.

•  He types “Poverty” into the search bar on the data.census.gov home page and then clicks on the “Search” 

button (see Figure 5.1). 

Figure 5.1.  Searching for Poverty Tables in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

20   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
20   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau•  On the next page, he clicks on the first table on “Poverty Status in the Past 12 Months,” which includes pov-

erty estimates for the population under age 18 (see Figure 5.2).

Figure 5.2.  Results of a Search for Poverty Tables in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   21 
What All Data Users Need to Know    21

U.S. Census Bureau•  Next, he selects the desired survey year by clicking on the current “Product” selection at the top of the page. 
(For the purposes of this case study, he used 2015 ACS 5-year estimates because they were the most recent 
data available at the time.)

•  The header should read “2015 ACS 5-Year Estimates Subject Tables.” 

•  Next, he clicks on the “Customize Table” button to select geographic areas of interest (see Figure 5.3).

Figure 5.3.  Customizing a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

•  On the next page, he scrolls to the top of the table and selects the Geography filter.

•  He clicks on “State” and then selects “Puerto Rico” (see Figure 5.4). Puerto Rico is a territory of the United 
States, but in data.census.gov, Puerto Rico is listed under the “State” category, and its municipios are listed 
under the “County” category.

Figure 5.4.  Selecting Data for Puerto Rico in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

22   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
22   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau•  Next, he clicks on “County” and then “Puerto Rico” to display a list of municipios.

•  He checks the box labeled “All counties in Puerto Rico.” He confirms that the “Selected Geographies” at the 

bottom of the page list the geographies that he needs for his analysis. 

•  He then clicks on the “Close” button in the lower right corner to view the table with his updated geography 

selections (see Figure 5.5). 

Figure 5.5.  Selecting Data for Puerto Rico Municipios in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

•  The online table displays data on children living in families below the poverty level. However, he decides to 

export the full table into a spreadsheet.

•  He clicks on the “Download” button at the top of the page (see Figure 5.6).

Figure 5.6.  Downloading a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   23 
What All Data Users Need to Know    23

U.S. Census Bureau•  He then uses the checkboxes to select the 2015 ACS 5-year data.

•  He chooses the File Type (CSV).

•  Finally, he clicks “Download” at the bottom of the screen. 

•  When the file is ready, he clicks “Download Now” to save the file to his computer (see Figures 5.7 and 5.8).

Figure 5.7.  Selecting a Survey Year and File Type in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Figure 5.8.  Downloading Selected Files From Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

24   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
24   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau•  Dr. Cueto opens the zipped CSV file (with prefix ACSST5Y2015.S1701_data_with_overlays) and sees that the 

child poverty rate in Puerto Rico in 2011–2015 was 57.4 percent.

•  Here, the results for municipios are presented in a map to show areas with the highest and lowest child pov-

erty rates in the Commonwealth (see Figure 5.9). This map is featured in the CIC’s Poverty by Age and Sex in 
Puerto Rico publication.24 

Figure 5.9.  Map of Child Poverty Rates in Puerto Rico: 2011–2015

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey.

24 University of Puerto Rico, Census Information Center, Poverty by Age Group and Sex in Puerto Rico, <www.upr.edu/iii-cayey/notas-del 

-centro-de-informacion-censal-cic-24-pobreza-por-grupo-de-edad-y-sexo-en-puerto-rico/>. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   25 
What All Data Users Need to Know    25

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #2: Youth Development Institute’s Child and Youth Well-Being Index

Skill Level: Introductory/Intermediate 
Subject: Child and youth well-being 
Type of Analysis: Creation of well-being index by combining Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS) estimates 
with data from other sources  
Tools Used: Data.census.gov and spreadsheet 
Author: Caridad Arroyo, Youth Development Institute (Instituto del Desarrollo de la Juventud)

About Our Institute

The Youth Development Institute of Puerto Rico (Instituto del Desarrollo de la Juventud, IDJ) is a nonprofit orga-
nization working to advance public policies—at both the federal and commonwealth level—to improve the lives of 
children and youth in Puerto Rico.25 Our work includes the collection and dissemination of data, development of 
research-driven public policy recommendations, and advocacy work that is driven by both data and people. We 
are the only organization focused on policy and advocacy around children’s issues in Puerto Rico. 

The Child and Youth Well-Being Index

Policymakers in Puerto Rico are hindered by a lack of up-to-date, reliable, and accessible data that provide 
information about the local context. Reliable data for local areas are needed to promote conversation, citizen 
participation, and public policy recommendations. Here is where the IDJ, in a strategic planning session, saw the 
opportunity to raise awareness about the living conditions of children and youth in Puerto Rico through the Child 
and Youth Well-Being Index.

The Child and Youth Well-Being Index is a tool developed by the IDJ with the assistance of Puerto Rico’s Institute 
of Statistics to examine the living conditions of children and youth in Puerto Rico. Data are from the Puerto 
Rico Community Survey (PRCS) and several other federal data sources. After a process of validation with local 
experts, we settled on an index with 27 indicators in five core areas of children’s development. The areas are 
economy, education, family, health, and security. The criteria to include indicators in the Index were: 

1.  Accessible and current data available every 1 or 2 years.

2.  From a valid source of information—mainly from federal reports and the U.S. Census Bureau.

3.  Consistent in their methodology over time to ensure valid comparisons across different years. 

The method used to construct the index is similar to the method used by the World Bank in their Knowledge 
Economy Index.26 This method allows us to normalize all data points in a uniform scale ranging from zero to 
10. Standardization is important because the indicators are not available in the same unit of measurement. At 
the end of the process, we calculate the mean of these normalized values and establish a grade, from A to F, to 
describe the living conditions of children in the Commonwealth.  

25 Youth Development Institute of Puerto Rico, <www.juventudpr.org/>. 
26 World Bank, The knowledge economy, the KAM methodology and World Bank operations (English), <http://documents.worldbank.org 

/curated/en/695211468153873436/The-knowledge-economy-the-KAM-methodology-and-World-Bank-operations>. 

26   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
26   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauAccessing PRCS Data for the Index

Of the 27 indicators in the Child and Youth Well-Being Index, 12 are drawn from the 2016 PRCS 1-year estimates. 
Our first step to access these PRCS data is to identify the relevant tables that we need in data.census.gov.

•  We navigate to the Census Bureau’s data.census.gov Web site <https://data.census.gov>. 

•  We select the “Advanced Search” option, which allows users to conduct keyword searches or search by using 

predefined topics, geographies, years, surveys, or codes (see Figure 5.10).

Figure 5.10.  Selecting Advanced Search in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   27 
What All Data Users Need to Know    27

U.S. Census Bureau•  Next, we click on the Topic filter to display a list of available topics. For example, to find data on grandparents 
responsible for their grandchildren under 18 years, we type “grandparents” into the search box and then click 
on the “Grandparents and Grandchildren” box.

•  After making our selection, we click on the “Search” box in the lower right corner (see Figure 5.11).

•  Next, we click on “Tables” at the top of the page to display a list of potential tables on grandparents and 

grandchildren.

•  From this list, we can identify those that are best suited for our analysis. For the measure of grandparents 

responsible for grandchildren, we select Table S1002 “Grandparents” (see Figure 5.12).

Figure 5.11.  Searching for Topics in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Figure 5.12.  Selecting a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

28   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
28   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauBy repeating this process for different topics, we identify the PRCS tables that we need for our analysis. Table 5.1 
provides a list of each measure and the source of the data in data.census.gov.

  Table 5.1. Indicators and Source Tables From the PRCS 

Indicator

Table ID Table name

Children under 18 years below the poverty level

DP03

Selected Economic Characteristics

Median family income with children under 18 years S1903

Median Income in the Past 12 Months (In 2016 
Inflation-Adjusted Dollars)

Unemployed teenagers between 16 and 19 years 
not enrolled in school

Families with children whose parents are unem-
ployed or not in the labor force

B14005 Sex by School Enrollment by Educational 
Attainment by Employment Status for the 
Population 16 To 19 Years

B23007 Presence of Own Children Under 18 Years by 

Family Type by Employment Status: Opposite-Sex 
Married-Couple Families and Families Maintained 
by Women and Men with No Spouse Present

Children under 18 years not enrolled in school

B14003 Sex by School Enrollment by Type of School by 

Children between 3 to 4 years not enrolled in 
school

Teenagers between 16 and 19 years not enrolled 
school and without high school diploma

Households with children living in single-parent 
families

Age for the Population 3 Years and Over

S1401

School Enrollment

B14005 Sex by School Enrollment by Educational 
Attainment by Employment Status for the 
Population 16 to 19 Years

B09002 Own Children Under 18 Years by Family Type and 

Age

Households with children under 18 years receiv-
ing food stamps

S2201

Food Stamps/Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program (SNAP)

Women 15 to 50 years who had a birth in the 
last 12 months and have less than a high school 
diploma

B13014 Women 15 to 50 Years Who Had a Birth in the 

Past 12 Months by Marital Status and Educational 
Attainment

Grandparents responsible for their grandchildren 
under 18 years

S1002

Grandparents

Children under 18 years without health insurance

S2701

Selected Characteristics of Health Insurance 
Coverage in the United States

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   29 
What All Data Users Need to Know    29

U.S. Census Bureau•  Now that we know the relevant table identifiers, we can use the search box to quickly find the data that we 

need. For example, to get data on grandparents responsible for grandchildren, we can type “S1002” into the 
search box and click “Search” (see Figure 5.13).

Figure 5.13.  Searching for Tables in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

•  American Community Survey (ACS) estimates for Table S1002 are displayed on the data.census.gov Web site. 
However, the default geography in data.census.gov is the United States, so we need to filter the results to get 
data for Puerto Rico. 

•  We click on the “Geographies” filter at the top of the page (see Figure 5.14). If the filters are not being dis-

played, try expanding the size of the browser window, or click on the “Customize Table” button to view the 
available filters.

Figure 5.14.  Selecting Geographies in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

30   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
30   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau•  We click on “State” and then select “Puerto Rico.” (Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States, but in  

data.census.gov, Puerto Rico is listed under the “State” category.)

•  Then we click “Close” in the lower right corner to view the results (see Figure 5.15)

Figure 5.15.  Selecting Data for Puerto Rico in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

•  Next, we select the desired survey year by clicking on the current “Product” selection at the top of the page 
(see Figure 5.16). For the purposes of this case study, we used 2016 ACS 1-year estimates because they were 
the most recent data available at the time.

Figure 5.16.  Customizing a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   31 
What All Data Users Need to Know    31

U.S. Census Bureau•  Next, we right click on the table and select “Export Table” and then “Export to CSV” to download the data to 

our computer (see Figure 5.17).

Figure 5.17.  Exporting a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

32   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
32   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauNow that we have the data in a spreadsheet format, we can manipulate it to produce the estimates we need. 
From Table S1002, we calculate the share of grandparents responsible for grandchildren (40.5 percent) by 
dividing the number of grandparents responsible for grandchildren (39,093) by the total number of grandpar-
ents living with grandchildren (96,568) (see Table 5.2).27 

  Table 5.2.  Portion of Table S1002 for Puerto Rico 

Subject

Total

Percent distribution of grandparents responsible for grandchildren 

Total

30 to 59 years

60 years and over

Estimate

Margin 
of error Estimate

Margin 
of error Estimate

Margin 
of error Estimate

Margin 
of error

Puerto Rico

96,568

±5,605

39,093

±3,548

19,490

±2,406

19,603

±2,583

Grandparents living with own  
grandchildren under 18 years

Race and Hispanic or Latino Origin

  One race

    White

    Black or African American

    American Indian and Alaska  
  Native

    Asian

    Native Hawaiian and Other  
  Pacific Islander

    Some other race

  Two or more races

Hispanic or Latino origin (of any  
 race)

N

67.8%

11.3%

N

±3.1

±1.6

N

62.5%

16.2%

N

±4.1

±2.8

N

60.9%

18.5%

N

±5.3

±4.3

N

64.1%

14.0%

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

16.3%

4.4%

±2.2

±1.2

16.2%

4.9%

±3.1

±2.0

16.2%

4.4%

±4.5

±2.5

16.3%

5.4%

98.8%

±0.7

99.5%

±0.5

99.4%

±0.8

99.6%

N

±6.2

±3.9

N

N

N

±4.4

±4.1

±0.7

N

White alone, not Hispanic or Latino

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N The estimate and margin of error columns indicates that data for this geographic area cannot be displayed because the number of sample 
cases is too small. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table S1002: Grandparents.

27 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table S1002: Grandparents. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   33 
What All Data Users Need to Know    33

U.S. Census BureauThe results are presented on our Puerto Rico’s Well-Being Index Web page.28 Data are available for each of 
the 27 indicators across five social dimensions: Education, Family, Safety and Risk, Economy, and Health and 
Lifestyles (see Figure 5.18). Users can also click the “Read More” option to get definitions and source information 
or to compare the data for Puerto Rico with data for the 50 states and the District of Columbia.

Figure 5.18.  Viewing Indicator Data on the Youth Development Institute Web Site

Source: Youth Development Institute of Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico’s Well-Being Index, 
 <http://juventudpr.org/en/data/well-being-index/puerto-ricos-well-being-index/>.

28 Youth Development Institute of Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico’s Well-Being Index, <http://juventudpr.org/en/data/well-being-index/puerto 

-ricos-well-being-index/>. 

34   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
34   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauThe 27 individual indicator values are combined into a single summary measure to create the Child and Youth 
Well-Being Index. These index values are presented for Puerto Rico and for each state and the District of 
Columbia on the Youth Development Institute’s Web site (see Figure 5.19).29 Massachusetts and Minnesota have 
among the highest (best) index values, scoring a “B,” while Puerto Rico ranks toward the bottom, scoring a “D.”

Figure 5.19.  Visualizing the Well-Being Index for Children and Youth

Source: Youth Development Institute of Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico’s Well-Being Index, 
 <http://juventudpr.org/en/data/well-being-index/puerto-ricos-well-being-index/>.

29 Youth Development Institute of Puerto Rico, Well-Being Index for Children and Youth, <http://juventudpr.org/en/data/well-being-index 

/tabla-comparativa-con-eeuu/>. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   35 
What All Data Users Need to Know    35

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #3: U.S. Migrants to Puerto Rico

Skill Level: Introductory/Intermediate 
Subject: Characteristics of Immigrants to Puerto Rico 
Type of Analysis: Comparison of immigrants to total population in Puerto Rico by age and income over time 
Tools Used: Data.census.gov and spreadsheet 
Author: Alberto Velázquez, Puerto Rico Institute of Statistics (PRIS)

At the Puerto Rico Institute of Statistics (PRIS), we keep track of migration flows in order to inform policymakers 
and the public in general about the diverse characteristics of this dynamic population.30 The Puerto Rico 
Community Survey (PRCS) collects data on multiple variables, such as age, sex, race, family and relationships, 
income, education, health insurance, and disabilities (among other characteristics) of the Puerto Rican population. 
The PRCS is the equivalent of the American Community Survey (ACS) for Puerto Rico.

The PRCS 1-year estimates allow us to access data about the island’s population that migrated from the United 
States from 2010 to 2016. Using these data, we compared the changing characteristics of the immigrant and total 
populations in Puerto Rico, focusing on two variables: median age and median income.

We accessed PRCS estimates for this analysis from data.census.gov, which consolidates data from the multiple 
surveys and censuses published by the U.S. Census Bureau.31 Data.census.gov provides an interactive platform for 
data users seeking population, housing, and economic information at the national, state, and county geographic 
levels, among others.

Accessing PRCS Data on U.S. Migrants to Puerto Rico

•  Go to the data.census.gov Web site at <https://data.census.gov>.

•  Click on “Advanced Search” under the search bar. This will bring you to the Advanced Search page (see 

Figure 5.20).

Figure 5.20.  Advanced Search in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

30 Puerto Rico Institute of Statistics, <https://estadisticas.pr/>. 
31 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

36   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
36   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau•  Begin with the Geography filter. Select “Geography” in the navigation pane on the left side of the screen to 

display a list of available geographies.

•  Select “State” and then select “Puerto Rico” from the “State” filter (see Figure 5.21). 

Figure 5.21.  Geography Filter Selection in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   37 
What All Data Users Need to Know    37

U.S. Census Bureau•  Next, choose the “Topics” filter, select “Populations and People,” and select “Residential Mobility.”

•  Both filters should appear in the “Selected Filters” at the bottom of the page.

•  Next, click on “Search” in the lower right corner of the page (see Figure 5.22).

Figure 5.22.  Residential Mobility Filter Selection in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

38   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
38   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau•  To find PRCS data on U.S. migrants to Puerto Rico, click on Table S0701PR “Geographic Mobility by Selected 

Characteristics in Puerto Rico” (see Figure 5.23).

Figure 5.23.  Table Selection in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

•  Next, select “Customize Table” (see Figure 5.24).

Figure 5.24.  Customize Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   39 
What All Data Users Need to Know    39

U.S. Census Bureau•  Select the desired survey year by clicking on the current “Product” selection. Make sure you select the most 
recent data set available. When this analysis was initially conducted, the 2016 ACS 1-year estimates were the 
most current. The header should read “2016 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates” and the geogra-
phy—“Puerto Rico” (see Figure 5.25).

Figure 5.25.  Selecting the Survey Year in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

•  Select “Download” at the top of the window. Then, use the Download Tables window to check the boxes for 

the 2010 to 2016 PRCS 1-year data. Select “CSV” as the file type and click on “Download” (see Figure 5.26).

Figure 5.26.  Survey Year and File Type Selection in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

40   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
40   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau•  After the files are prepared, click the “Download Now” button (see Figure 5.27).

Figure 5.27.  Download Tables in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

This will produce the zip file. Open the zip file to extract your tables. The data are located in a series of CSV 
files—one file for each year—with the following prefixes: 

•  ACSST1Y2010.S0701PR_data_with_overlays

•  ACSST1Y2011.S0701PR_data_with_overlays

•  ACSST1Y2012.S0701PR_data_with_overlays

•  ACSST1Y2013.S0701PR_data_with_overlays

•  ACSST1Y2014.S0701PR_data_with_overlays

•  ACSST1Y2015.S0701PR_data_with_overlays

•  ACSST1Y2016.S0701PR_data_with_overlays

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   41 
What All Data Users Need to Know    41

U.S. Census BureauTo analyze the selected characteristics over time, we created charts to display trends in median age and median 
income during the period (see Figure 5.28).

Figure 5.28.  Median Age and Median Income Among the Immigrant and Total       
                    Population in Puerto Rico: 2010 to 2016

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey.

42   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
42   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauWe do not include the margins of error (MOEs) in the graphical representations of the data, because we want to 
present a basic comparison of the point estimates between the immigrant population and the total population of 
Puerto Rico. However, respective MOEs for the point estimates are included in Table 5.3.

 Table 5.3. Median Age and Median Income for the Immigrant and Total Puerto Rico Population: 2010 to 2016 

Median Age

Median Income

Year

2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

Total PR

MOE

Immigrant

MOE

Total PR

37.7
37.9
38.3
38.9
39.8
40.4
41.0

±0.2
±0.2
±0.2
±0.2
±0.2
±0.2
±0.2

28.0
32.8
33.4
34.4
41.5
30.4
29.9

±3.3
±5.2
±2.5
±4.1
±4.8
±3.5
±4.4

$11,931 
$11,937 
$12,317 
$12,283 
$12,212 
$12,259 
$12,581 

MOE

±124
±159
±152
±141
±151
±135
±220

Immigrant

$9,300 
$11,611 
$9,598 
$10,560 
$11,577 
$11,114 
$11,913 

MOE

±1,243
±1,454
±1,537
±1,309
±2,829
±1,218
±2,550

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey.

The results allow a comparison of age and income between recent immigrants to Puerto Rico and the total popu-
lation on the island, and how these characteristics have changed over time. This analysis helps the PRIS advise 
policymakers and the public about changes in the characteristics of the Commonwealth’s dynamic immigrant 
population. These analyses are included in PRIS’s annual report, “Migrant Population Profile,” available in the pub-
lications section of our Web site32 

32 Puerto Rico Institute of Statistics, Publications, Perfil del Migrante, <https://estadisticas.pr/en/publicaciones/perfil-del-migrante>. 

Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data   43 
What All Data Users Need to Know    43

U.S. Census Bureau 
6. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

U.S. Census Bureau, About the Puerto Rico Community Survey 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/about/puerto-rico-community-survey.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, What Is the American Community Survey? 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/about.html>. 

U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: 
What All Data Users Need to Know  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks/general.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Releases 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data-releases.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, Geography and ACS  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography-acs.html>.

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Tables and Tools  
<www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and-tools/>.

U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov Resources 
<www.census.gov/data/what-is-data-census-gov.html>.

44   Understanding and Using Puerto Rico Community Survey Data 
44   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau