An ofﬁcial website of the United States government Here’s how you know

(cid:0)

   BACK TO TOPICS PAGE [/ACS/WWW/ABOUT/WHY-WE-ASK-EACH-QUES…

We ask about whether a home is owned or rented to create

statistics about home ownership and renters. We also ask

questions about the monthly rent amount or how much the

home and property are worth to produce statistics about rent

and home value.

These data help determine whether adequate housing is

affordable for residents and provide and fund housing

assistance programs. They also help enforce laws, regulations,

and policies designed to eliminate discrimination in private-

market housing, government programs, and in society.

Your privacy concerns

We use your conﬁdential survey answers to create statistics like those in the results below and in the full tables that contain all th

data—no one is able to ﬁgure out your survey answers from the statistics we produce. The Census Bureau is legally bound to

strict conﬁdentiality requirements. Individual records are not shared with anyone, including federal agencies and law enforcemen

entities. By law, the Census Bureau cannot share respondents' answers with anyone, including companies, other federal agenci

and law enforcement.

Questions as they appear on the form

We ask three questions about ownership status, monthly rent, and home value to better
understand the housing market.

(cid:0)

   VIEW QUESTIONS

Results from these questions

We compile the results from these questions to provide communities with important statistics to measure housing affordability. Yo
can see some of these published statistics here for the nation, states, and your community.

United States

Housing Units that are Owner-Occupied

65.0 percent [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP04]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates
Data Proﬁles/Housing Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP04]

Median Value of Owner-Occupied Housing Units

303,400 dollars [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP04]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates
Data Proﬁles/Housing Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP04]

Median Monthly Gross Rent (Utility & Fuel Costs Included)

1,348 dollars [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP04]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates
Data Proﬁles/Housing Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP04]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

Ownership, home value, and rent data help communities:

Provide Adequate Housing

We ask about the different types of households in a community (single people, couples, families, roommates, etc.) and rates of

home rental and ownership to help communities understand whether available housing meets the needs of residents. Data abou

owners and renters, in combination with housing costs and the combined income of all people in a household, help communities

understand whether housing is affordable for residents.

When housing is not sufﬁcient or affordable, statistics about owners, renters, and housing costs help communities:

Enroll eligible households in programs designed to assist them.
Qualify for grants from the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), HOME Investment Partnership Program, Emergency Solutions

Grants (ESG), Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA), and other programs.

When rental housing is not affordable, the Department of Housing and Urban Developments uses rent data to determine the

amount of tenant subsidies in housing assistance programs. The amount of subsidies is based on the rental distribution of housi
units (the standard cost of different types of housing in different areas of the country) and Fair Market Rents.

Plan Community Development

Knowing how the balance of rented homes, mortgaged homes, and owned homes changes over time helps communities:

Understand changes in local housing markets.
Identify opportunities to improve tax, assistance, and zoning policies.
Reduce tax revenue losses from vacant or abandoned properties.
Determine housing assistance funding (Fair Market Rents).

Ensure Equal Opportunity

We ask about the characteristics of people who rent and people who own homes, such as age, sex, race, Hispanic origin, and

disability status to help the government and communities enforce laws designed to eliminate discrimination in housing, such as t
1968 Fair Housing Act.

Understand Changing Households

Statistics about whether older residents are staying in homes as they age or moving into rented homes; and whether young peo

are staying with parents, renting with roommates, or buying homes, help governments and communities distribute funds

appropriately between home ownership and rental housing programs and services for residents.

History of ownership, home value, and rent questions

The ownership question originated with the 1890 Census, while home value and rent questions originated with the 1940 Census.
They were added to the ACS in 2005 when it replaced the decennial census long form.

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

[https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

