Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What the Business Community Needs to Know

Issued October 2020

Acknowledgments 

Linda A. Jacobsen, Vice President, U.S. Programs, Population Reference 
Bureau (PRB), and Mark Mather, Associate Vice President, U.S. Programs, 
PRB, drafted this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey Ofce. Other PRB staf who assisted in 
drafting and reviewing the handbook include Lillian Kilduf and Paola 
Scommegna. 

Some of the material in this handbook was adapted from the Census 
Bureau’s 2008 publication, A Compass for Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What the Business Community Needs to 
Know, drafted by Kenneth Hodges. American Community Survey data users 
who provided feedback and case studies for this handbook include: Marcela 
Alvarez, Kirby Brady, Rob Galbraith, Svenja Gudell, Kenneth Hodges, Aaron 
Terrazas, and Stephen Tordella. 

Nicole Scanniello, Gretchen Gooding, and Charles Gamble, Census Bureau, 
contributed to the planning and review of this handbook series. 

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of Albert E. 
Fontenot Jr., Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs, Deborah M. 
Stempowski, Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs, and Donna M. 
Daily, Chief, American Community Survey Ofce. 

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the review and 
release of these handbooks include: Andrew Hait, Michael Starsinic, Janice 
Valdisera, Edward Welniak, and Ellen Wilson. 

Faye Brock, Linda Chen, and Christine Geter provided publication 
management, graphic design and composition, and editorial review for print 
and electronic media under the direction of Janet Sweeney, Chief of the 
Graphic and Editorial Services Branch, Public Information Ofce. 

 
 
  
 
 
Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data 
What the Business Community Needs to Know 

Issued October 2020 

U.S. Department of Commerce 
Wilbur Ross, 
Secretary 

Karen Dunn Kelley, 
Deputy Secretary 

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau, 
Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey 
Data: What the Business 
Community Needs to Know, 
U.S. Government Publishing Ofce, 
Washington, DC, 2020. 

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director 

Ron Jarmin, 
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Ofcer 

Albert E. Fontenot Jr., 
Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs 

Deborah M. Stempowski, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs 

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Ofce 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 

1. How Businesses Use ACS Data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 

2. ACS Data Products for Business Uses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5 

3. Case Studies Using ACS Data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9 

4. Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   iii 
iii 

What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
 
This page is intentionally blank. 

UNDERSTANDING AND USING AMERICAN 
COMMUNITY SURVEY DATA: 
WHAT THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY NEEDS TO 
KNOW 

Suppose a restaurant owner wants to determine the 
best location to start a new franchise. Managers at an 
engineering frm want to expand their business but 
need more information about the local workforce. A 
clothing retailer needs information about potential cus-
tomers before opening a new store, distribution center, 
or warehouse. Where can businesses fnd the data they 
need to make informed decisions? 

The U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey 
(ACS) provides corporations, small businesses, and 
individuals the detailed social, economic, housing, and 
demographic data they need to gauge the sales poten-
tial of products and services, better understand the 
workforce, and set strategies for growth. 

This guide provides a brief overview of how businesses 
are using ACS data to stay competitive, run efciently, 
and meet customers’ needs. For many business appli-
cations, the focus is not on the ACS data themselves 
but on marketing products built from them. Many 
third-party data providers incorporate ACS data into 
business-friendly products, maps, and reports that help 
businesses with site selection, consumer segmentation, 
inventory and category management, and other strate-
gies. But whether the focus is on ACS data accessed 
from the Census Bureau’s Web site or derived, third-
party products, business users should be aware of 
the opportunities and challenges presented by ACS 
data—particularly when working with data for small 
geographic areas. 

What Is the ACS? 

The ACS is a nationwide survey designed to provide 
communities with reliable and timely social, economic, 
housing, and demographic data every year. A sepa-
rate annual survey, called the Puerto Rico Community 
Survey (PRCS), collects similar data about the popu-
lation and housing units in Puerto Rico. The Census 
Bureau uses data collected in the ACS and the PRCS 

to provide estimates on a broad range of population, 
housing unit, and household characteristics for states, 
counties, cities, school districts, congressional districts, 
census tracts, block groups, and many other geo-
graphic areas. 

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 3.5 million 
addresses, with survey information collected nearly 
every day of the year. Data are pooled across a calen-
dar year to produce estimates for that year. As a result, 
ACS estimates refect data that have been collected 
over a period of time rather than for a single point in 
time as in the decennial census, which is conducted 
every 10 years and provides population counts as of 
April 1 of the census year. 

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been col-
lected over a 12-month period and are available for 
geographic areas with at least 65,000 people. Starting 
with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau also produces 
“1-year Supplemental Estimates”—simplifed versions 
of popular ACS tables—for geographic areas with at 
least 20,000 people. The Census Bureau combines 5 
consecutive years of ACS data to produce multiyear 
estimates for geographic areas with fewer than 65,000 
residents. These 5-year estimates represent data col-
lected over a period of 60 months. 

For more detailed information about the ACS—how 
to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, understand-
ing multiyear estimates, knowing which geographic 
areas are covered in the ACS, and how to access 
ACS data on the Census Bureau’s Web site—see the 
Census Bureau’s handbook, Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users 
Need to Know.1 

1 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   1 
1 

What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
1. HOW BUSINESSES USE ACS DATA 

Using ACS Estimates for Site Selection 

Businesses need up-to-date information about their 
potential customers before creating a new business or 
expanding an existing one. Site selection—the evalua-
tion of business needs measured against the merits of 
potential locations—is a complex process that requires 
detailed information about local communities. As 
the premier source of social, economic, housing, and 
demographic estimates for local areas, the American 
Community Survey (ACS) provides businesses with a 
wealth of free information that they can use for select-
ing a new location or for evaluating the performance 
of existing locations:     

•  Social and economic characteristics (e.g., educa-
tional attainment, employment status, language 
spoken at home, and income). 

•  Housing characteristics (e.g., homeownership, 
housing costs, average household size, age of 
housing, and computer/Internet use). 

•  Demographic characteristics (e.g., age, sex, and 

family structure). 

Many businesses also need workers with specifc 
degrees and need to know where those workers live, 
how long it takes them to get to work, and whether 
they drive or take public transportation. The ACS 
provides detailed information about the population 
and workforce in local communities that can help busi-
nesses choose appropriate locations for a new store, 
ofce, or warehouse, including: 

•  Labor force status (e.g., employment, unemploy-

ment, and full-time/part-time status). 

•  Means of transportation to work and travel time to 

work. 

• 

Income and occupation (e.g., household income, 
earnings, occupation, and industry). 

•  Education (e.g., highest level of education and feld 

of bachelor’s degree). 

Some businesses analyze ACS data directly to inform 
decisions about site selection, but third parties 
often help businesses access the ACS data that they 
need. For example, the Greater Houston Partnership 
uses ACS data to help businesses understand how 
Houston’s population is changing and to encourage 
economic development.2 In Maryland, the Charles 

2 U.S. Census Bureau, Stats in Action: Greater Houston Partnership 

Uses ACS Data, 2011, <www.census.gov/library/video/sia_greater 
_houston.html>. 

County Department of Economic Development ana-
lyzes ACS data to help local businesses make informed 
decisions that could increase sales, add jobs, and 
expand operations.3 The U.S. Census Bureau’s State 
Data Centers can also help businesses access ACS and 
other data for decision-making.4 

Because ACS data for small geographic areas (such as 
census tracts, which generally have a population size 
between 1,200 and 8,000 people) are only available in 
the form of 5-year estimates, many businesses rely on 
proprietary single-year estimates and 5-year demo-
graphic projections for these areas provided by private 
sector marketing information frms. For example, to 
select the best site for expansion, a business may pre-
fer to analyze estimates of the number of households 
with children for block groups (statistical divisions of 
census tracts that typically contain between 600 and 
3,000 people) in 2019 combined with projections of 
the number of such households in 2024, rather than 
rely on ACS estimates of households with children 
in 2014–2018. Single-year estimates are particularly 
important for areas experiencing recent growth or 
decline, but year-to-year changes are difcult to dis-
cern with 5-year estimates. While most private-sector 
data suppliers acknowledge the use and value of ACS 
data in the production of their proprietary demo-
graphic estimates and projections, many businesses 
that use these data are unaware of the important con-
tribution of ACS estimates to these products.  

For more information about ACS multiyear esti-
mates, see the section on “Understanding and Using 
ACS Single-Year and Multiyear Estimates” in the 
Census Bureau’s handbook, Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data 
Users Need to Know.5 

Using ACS Estimates for Consumer 
Segmentation 

ACS estimates are also used for consumer segmen-
tation—the process of dividing potential customers 
into groups, or segments, based on their distinctive 
characteristics. Consumer segmentation data provide 
businesses with unique insights into customer lifestyles 
and behaviors, and how they vary across diferent 
communities. They help businesses fnd their “ideal 

3 Charles County Department of Economic Development Charles 

County by the Numbers, <www.meetcharlescounty.com/charles 
-county-by-the-numbers/>. 

4 U.S. Census Bureau, State Data Center (SDC) Program, 

<www.census.gov/about/partners/sdc.html>. 

5 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

2   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
2  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
customers” and determine the best ways to market 
specifc products and services to them. Community 
segmentation profles can also help businesses under-
stand why some existing or potential locations may 
perform better than others. 

Consumer segmentation systems are widely used in 
the private sector because they enable more precise 
identifcation and targeting of potential customers 
than demographic data alone. Data are often provided 
for very small geographic areas—such as ZIP codes— 
and may be derived from a combination of ACS esti-
mates and data from other public and private sources.6 
However, given the proprietary nature of these sys-
tems, the exact role of ACS data in the production of 
these systems is unclear. 

For more information about how businesses use ACS 
data, see the U.S. Department of Commerce report 
The Value of the American Community Survey: Smart 
Government, Competitive Businesses, and Informed 
Citizens.7 

Using ACS Estimates for Small 
Geographic Areas 

Businesses often need data for very small areas, and 
the ACS is the most authoritative source of annual 
small-area estimates available. However, because the 
ACS is based on a sample, rather than on all hous-
ing units and people, ACS estimates have a degree of 
uncertainty associated with them, called sampling error. 

TIP:  Sampling  error  is  minimal  for  large  geographic 
areas and population groups, but there may be large 
errors  associated  with  estimates  based  on  a  small 
subset of the sample. 

The suitability of ACS estimates for businesses 
depends on the application and the level of certainty 
required. 

Some businesses may use ACS estimates for individual 
block groups or markets consisting of one or a few 
block groups. For example, a fast-food business might 
consider the size and characteristics of the population 
in a three-block group area to be critical to the success 
of a location. However, ACS estimates on age, income, 
and employment may be too uncertain to support a 
decision to establish a franchise at that location. Data 
users should examine the margins of error (MOEs) 
reported for the geographic areas they use to gauge 

6 See, for example, Esri, Tapestry Segmentation, <www.esri.com 

/landing-pages/tapestry>; and Claritas, ZIP code Look-up, 
<https://claritas360.claritas.com/mybestsegments/#zipLookup>. 

7 U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics & Statistics 

Administration, 2015, The Value of the American Community Survey: 
Smart Government, Competitive Businesses, and Informed Citizens, 
<www.commerce.gov/news/reports/2015/05/value-american 
-community-survey-smart-government-competitive-businesses 
-and>. 

the level of uncertainty involved. If geographic areas 
are aggregated together, data users should calculate 
and examine the MOE for the derived estimate. 

Many third-party data suppliers do not report MOEs 
with their ACS-based estimates and may further adjust 
ACS estimates to match single-year population and 
housing unit control totals. Therefore, the uncertainty 
around these custom estimates may be considerably 
greater than that of the original ACS estimates from 
which they are derived. 

In the absence of data on individual consumers, 
businesses may sometimes use block group charac-
teristics as a proxy. For example, a publisher might 
have the name, address, and billing history of current 
subscribers to one magazine but need to append 
income, presence of children, and education data to 
these subscriber records to target prospects for a new 
publication. Because each subscriber’s address cor-
responds to a block group, the publisher might infer 
these characteristics based on the characteristics of 
the block groups where subscribers live. This approach 
is error prone even if block group data are perfectly 
accurate, and the error associated with ACS estimates 
adds additional uncertainty. 

For these reasons, many businesses tap the resources 
of household-level databases that are available from 
commercial suppliers. These databases have their own 
errors and often include a limited number of variables, 
so the temptation to use the characteristics of indi-
vidual block groups persists.  

However, ACS estimates for block groups have a high 
degree of uncertainty. The ACS might indicate that 58 
percent of households in a block group have a child 
when the (unknown) reality is only 29 percent. Clearly, 
it would be a mistake to market to this block group 
as one with many children. But marketing eforts 
are not confned to a single block group, and a busi-
ness might conclude that, across thousands of block 
groups, inferences of this type might work well enough 
to outperform alternatives such as targeting based on 
county data or untargeted blanket mailings. It is up to 
individual businesses to know the requirements of their 
applications, and to understand the limitations of ACS 
data before committing to applications of this type. 

For more information about sampling error in the 
ACS, see the chapters on “Understanding Error and 
Determining Statistical Signifcance” and “Calculating 
Measures of Error for Derived Estimates” in the 
Census Bureau’s handbook, Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data 
Users Need to Know.8 

8 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   3 
What the Business Community Needs to Know  3 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using ACS Data on Population and 
Housing Counts 

Many businesses, such as commercial developers, seek 
areas of rapid population and housing growth for their 
untapped potential and attractive demographics. 

which may lead to errors in the population and hous-
ing unit estimates. In such cases, data users are again 
encouraged to rely more upon noncount statistics, 
such as percent distributions or averages. Many busi-
nesses also rely on third-party private organizations 
to provide them with value-added ACS data for these 
small geographic areas.    

TIP: Data users need to understand that the ACS was 
designed to provide estimates of the characteristics of 
the population, not to provide counts of the population 
in diferent geographic areas or population subgroups. 

For more information about ACS methods, visit the 
Census Bureau’s Design and Methodology Report Web 
page.12 

Using ACS Estimates as Building Blocks 
for Larger Geographic Areas 

Applications that use small areas as building blocks 
to form business-specifc trade areas should be well 
served by ACS data. Companies may use data supplied 
by private organizations to examine demographic data 
for custom areas such as 3-mile radii around store 
locations, 20-minute drive times to bank branches, or 
telecommunications service areas. 

In some cases, data users will need to construct cus-
tom ACS estimates by combining data across multiple 
geographic areas or population subgroups, or it may 
be necessary to derive a new percentage, proportion, 
or ratio from published ACS data. 

TIP: One way to address the issue of unreliable esti-
mates for individual census tracts or block groups is to 
aggregate geographic areas, yielding larger samples 
and more reliable estimates.  

In such cases, additional calculations are needed to 
produce MOEs and standard errors (SEs), and to 
conduct tests of statistical signifcance for the derived 
estimates. For more information, see the section on 
“Calculating Measures of Error for Derived Estimates” 
in the Census Bureau’s handbook, Understanding and 
Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know.13 

Therefore, data users are encouraged to rely more 
upon noncount statistics, such as percent distributions 
or averages, when using ACS estimates. 

The Census Bureau’s Population Estimates Program 
produces and disseminates the ofcial estimates of the 
population for the nation, states, counties, cities and 
towns, and estimates of housing units for states and 
counties.9 For 2010 and other decennial census years, 
the decennial census provides the ofcial counts of 
population and housing units.10 

As with most household surveys, the ACS data are 
controlled so that the numbers of housing units and 
people in certain categories agree with the Census 
Bureau’s ofcial estimates from the Population 
Estimates Program. The ACS uses a weighting method 
to ensure that ACS estimates are consistent with of-
cial Census Bureau population estimates by age, sex, 
race, and Hispanic origin—as well as with estimates 
of total housing units. ACS estimates are controlled 
to ofcial population and housing units at the county 
level. ACS single-year estimates are controlled to pop-
ulation and housing unit estimates as of July 1 of the 
survey year, while ACS 5-year estimates are controlled 
to the average of the July 1 population and housing 
unit estimates over the 5-year period.11 

Starting with the 2009 survey, ACS estimates of the 
total population of incorporated places (self-governing 
cities, towns, or villages) and minor civil divisions (such 
as townships) are also adjusted so that they are con-
sistent with ofcial population estimates. 

However, ACS data for small statistical areas (such as 
census tracts and block groups) have no control totals, 

9 Census Bureau, Population and Housing Unit Estimates, 

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest.html>. 

10 See, for example, the U.S. Census Bureau, Census of Population 

12 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Design and 

and Housing, CPH-2, Population and Housing Unit Counts report 
series, <www.census.gov/prod/www/decennial.html>. 

Methodology Report, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/methodology/design-and-methodology.html>. 

11 In order for the ACS to make use of the best available population 

estimates as controls, the multiyear weighting uses the population 
estimates of the most recent vintage—or version—for all years in the 
period in order to derive the multiyear controls. 

13 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know, 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

4   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
4  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  ACS DATA PRODUCTS FOR BUSINESS USES 

Census Business Builder 

In September 2015, the U.S. Census Bureau launched 
a new data product for the business community: 
Census Business Builder.14 As its name implies, Census 
Business Builder is designed for users needing data to 
help start or grow a business or to better understand 
an area’s business landscape. The data can be used in 
determining potential locations for new businesses or 
in creating a business plan for investors. 

There are two editions of Census Business Builder: 
the Small Business Edition and the Regional Analyst 
Edition.15 

The Small Business Edition was developed primarily for 
small business owners who need data for their busi-
ness plans or to better understand their potential mar-
ket, but large businesses can also fnd data for their 
industries by using the Search tool. The tool includes 
the following data: 

•  Social, economic, housing, and demographic data 

from the ACS. 

•  Business data from the County Business Patterns, 

Nonemployer Statistics, the Economic Census, and 
the Survey of Business Owners. 

•  Labor force data from the Quarterly Workforce 

Indicators program. 

14 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Business Builder (CBB), 

<www.census.gov/data/data-tools/cbb.html>. 

15 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Business Builder: Small Business 
Edition - 3.1.0, <https://cbb.census.gov/sbe/#>; and Regional Analyst 
Edition - 3.1.0, <https://cbb.census.gov/rae/#>. 

•  Employment and Wages data from the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics’ Quarterly Census of Employment 
and Wages. 

• 

Imports and Exports data from the International 
Trade program. 

•  Consumer spending data from Esri (a company 

that provides GIS mapping software). 

•  Farms data from the Census of Agriculture, USDA. 

In July 2017, a new feature was added that allows users 
to upload and map their own data. More information 
about uploading data and instructions are available on 
the Census Business Builder Web page.16 

The Small Business Edition provides easy access to 
information about potential customers and similar 
businesses. For example, the map and data dashboard 
displayed in Figure 2.1 present information about the 
share of adults with a bachelor’s degree or higher 
in Fairfax County, Virginia, and other counties in the 
Washington, DC, area combined with other social, eco-
nomic, and housing data from the ACS and data on the 
total number of Systems Design establishments (busi-
nesses providing IT expertise). The variable displayed 
on the map can be changed using the Map Variables 
menu on the top toolbar, and the Filter menu allows 
the user to identify specifc areas that meet their own 
criteria. Data in the map can be downloaded as an 
Excel, .csv, or shapefle using the download button 
located in the upper right corner of the map. 

16 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Business Builder (CBB), 

<www.census.gov/data/data-tools/cbb.How_Tos.html>. 

Why this tool may be right for you 

Why you may want to consider another tool 

You want to open a new business or expand an existing 
business. 

The data are limited to states, counties, places, ZIP codes, 
and census tracts. 

The tool combines American Community Survey (ACS) 
data with economic data to guide your research. 

Results include only a subset of all ACS topics. 

Interactive maps allow you to select areas and compare 
results to those of neighboring areas. 

Reports are downloadable and printable. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   5 
What the Business Community Needs to Know  5 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The interactive and customizable dashboard includes 
charts that show historical data for many of the 
mapped data variables as well as a comparison of the 
selected area to the state and nation (see Figure 2.2). 
Users can change map variables in the dashboard by 

clicking the edit icons (pencils) located below each 
statistic on the right side of the dashboard. 

After exploring the data on the map, users can also 
create Local Business Profle reports (by clicking the 
Create Report link) that include all the map variables. 

Figure 2.1.  Sample Map From Census Business Builder: Small Business Edition 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census Business Builder: Small Business Edition - 3.0, <https://cbb.census.gov/sbe/#>. 

  Figure 2.2. Sample Dashboard From Census Business Builder: Small Business Edition 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census Business Builder: Small Business Edition - 3.0, <https://cbb.census.gov/sbe/#>. 

6   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
6  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
  
 
Users can click on “My Potential Customers” on the 
left side of the page to display demographic, socio-
economic, and housing estimates for the selected 
geographic area (see Figure 2.3). Reports are also 
available on Businesses and Consumer Spending. 
Users can display margins of error for estimates by 
checking the box at the top of the page. 

The demographic and consumer spending data are 
available at the state, county, city/town, ZIP code, and 
census tract levels; economic data are available at the 
state, county, and city/town levels; and agriculture and 
trade data are available at the state level only. 

The “ZIP code” data in Census Business Builder com-
bine ZIP code Tabulation Area (ZCTA) data from the 
ACS with ZIP code data from other sources. ZCTAs are 
aggregations of census blocks that form “generalized 
areal representations of United States Postal Service 
(USPS) ZIP code service areas.”17 Many businesses use 
data for ZIP codes to design marketing campaigns 

17 U.S. Census Bureau, ZIP code Tabulation Areas (ZCTAs), 

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/guidance/geo-areas 
/zctas.html>. 

based on the characteristics of people living in difer-
ent mail delivery areas. 

USPS ZIP codes represent a collection of mail delivery 
routes rather than geographic areas with clear bound-
aries. While ZIP codes for sets of mailing addresses 
may be changed every year by USPS, the Census 
Bureau only updates ZCTA defnitions periodically. For 
example, the most recent ZCTA defnitions are from 
2010. In contrast, many private data suppliers update 
their ZIP code defnitions/areas at least once a year. 

The Regional Analyst Edition of Census Business 
Builder was developed primarily for chambers of 
commerce, regional planners, and others who need a 
broader portrait of the people and businesses in their 
service area. It presents data for all sectors of the 
economy and for user-defned regions based on com-
binations of states, counties, cities/towns, ZIP codes, 
and tracts. You can also build regions by combining 
diferent types of geographic areas. 

Figure 2.3.  Sample Local Business Profle From Census Business Builder: Small Business Edition 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census Business Builder: Small Business Edition - 3.0, <https://cbb.census.gov/sbe/#>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   7 
What the Business Community Needs to Know  7 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
 
 
 
  
A sample map showing the percentage of individuals 
with a bachelor’s degree or higher for the Washington, 
DC Metro area that was created with the Regional 
Analyst Edition is shown in Figure 2.4. 

data.census.gov and obtain selected Detailed Tables, 
Data Profles, and Subject Tables for the Sioux City, 
Omaha, and Lincoln metropolitan areas to determine 
which area is the best candidate for an initial expansion. 

The Regional Analyst Edition includes the same 
interactive and customizable data dashboard, down-
load options, and map features as the Small Business 
Edition. 

Data.census.gov and Other Data Sources 

Businesses with occasional or limited data needs will 
be well served by the prepackaged ACS data prod-
ucts available through data.census.gov—the Census 
Bureau’s primary tool for accessing data from the 
ACS, the Puerto Rico Community Survey, the decen-
nial census, and many other Census Bureau data sets.18 
Data.census.gov provides access to ACS data for a 
wide range of geographic areas, including states, cities, 
counties, census tracts, and block groups. 

Many ACS products available through data.census.gov 
function best as a lookup tool. If data users have a few 
areas in mind and want specifc data and maps for those 
areas, they can access the relevant ACS product. For 
example, a small Des Moines-based retailer could go to 

18 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Other business users may need to access ACS esti-
mates for many geographic areas across the country. 
For example, a real estate frm could download ACS 
data every year to help monitor the demographics in 
a large number of sites defned as aggregations of 
block groups. A fnancial services provider with data 
on the age and mortgage status of its customers might 
use ACS Public Use Microdata Sample data to build a 
model estimating the likelihood that its customers have 
children approaching college age. Or a business might 
use ACS data on housing costs as a percentage of 
income to identify neighborhoods where homeowners 
face difculty in making house payments. 

These more advanced users also have several options 
to access more detailed ACS data through download-
able Summary Files, the Public Use Microdata Sample 
Files, or the Census Bureau’s Application Programming 
Interface (API).19 

19 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Summary File Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data 
/summary-fle.html>; American Community Survey (ACS), Accessing 
PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/access.html>; Developers, <www.census.gov/developers/>. 

Figure 2.4.  Sample Map From Census Business Builder: Regional Analyst Edition 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census Business Builder: Regional Analyst Edition - 3.0, <https://cbb.census.gov/rae/#>.  

8   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
8  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
3. CASE STUDIES USING ACS DATA 

Case Study #1: San Diego Region: City Data Profle 

Skill Level: Introductory/Intermediate 
Subject: County- and city-level demographic and socioeconomic data 
Type of Analysis: Analysis and visualization of American Community Survey (ACS) data trends across the nation, 
state, county, and subcounty areas 
Tools Used: Data.census.gov, spreadsheet, data visualization tools 
Authors: Marcela Alvarez, Research Coordinator, San Diego Regional Economic Development Center (EDC); and 
Kirby Brady, Research Director, San Diego Regional EDC 

San Diego Regional Economic Development Corporation (EDC) uses a multitude of publicly available data sets 
coupled with visualization software to create powerful economic development tools that provide clarity and 
insight into the region’s demographic and economic landscape. As part of a greater initiative to uncover and 
highlight subregional trends within the county, EDC produced a demographic and socioeconomic profle for the 
City of San Marcos, California. This profle and accompanying online interactive dashboard were created to bet-
ter inform business leaders, other decision makers, and the public about the city’s social, economic, and demo-
graphic characteristics. City-level data can be compared with data for the county, state, and nation to provide 
additional context. 

We used data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS) and Longitudinal Employer-
Household Dynamics (LEHD) program to inform parts of the profle (see Table 3.1). The Census Bureau releases 
single-year ACS data for geographic areas with 65,000 people or more. Since the City of San Marcos—the small-
est geographic area under consideration—meets this threshold, we were able to use 1-year estimates throughout 
the analysis. EDC recognizes that all estimates have an associated level of uncertainty. However, after careful 
consideration, margins of error were not included in the profle. 

Other data sources used in the profle include the San Diego Association of Governments, Emsi (a labor market 
analytics frm), the State of California Employment Development Department, and ReferenceUSA.

  Table 3.1.  List of Key Variables and Data Sources 

Variable 

Median household income 

Population below poverty level 

Educational attainment 

Field of bachelor ’s degree 

Median income by industry 

Work destination 

Distance to work 

Data Set 

ACS 1-Year Estimates 

ACS 1-Year Estimates 

ACS 1-Year Estimates 

ACS 1-Year Estimates 

ACS 1-Year Estimates 

LEHD OnTheMap 

LEHD OnTheMap 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   9 
What the Business Community Needs to Know  9 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
 
 
 
 
To obtain the desired data, use the data.census.gov “Advanced Search” option, as follows: 

•  Go to the data.census.gov Web site at <https://data.census.gov>. 

•  Select “Advanced Search” below the search bar (see Figure 3.1). 

  Figure 3.1.  Selecting Advanced Search in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

10   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
10  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
•  Select “Geography” in the navigation pane on the left side of the screen to display a list of available geog-

raphies (see Figure 3.2). 

•  Select “Place,” then “California.” From here, you can scroll to select “San Marcos city, California” or you 

can use the magnifying glass icon to search for places within California. This geography will appear in the 
“Selected Filters” at the bottom of the page. 

Figure 3.2.  Selecting Geographic Areas in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   11 
11 

What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
  
 
 
•  Use the Geography flter to add the United States, California, and San Diego County to your selections. At 
the end of this step, you should have four geographic areas specifed in your “Selected Filters” (see Figure 
3.3). 

•  Then click on the “Years” flter and select “2017.” The year “2017” should appear next to the previously 

selected geographic areas in “Selected Filters.” For the purposes of this case study, we used 2017 because 
they were the most recent data available at the time.) 

  Figure 3.3.  Selecting Years and Verifying Selected Filters in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

12   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
12  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
 •  Since we are interested in the city’s socioeconomic characteristics, we begin by searching for informa-

tion about educational attainment. Select “Topics,” “Education,” and “Educational Attainment.” Then, click 
“Search” in the lower right corner (see Figure 3.4). 

Figure 3.4.  Selecting the Educational Attainment Topic in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   13 
13 

What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
  
•  Use the descriptive table titles to make your selection. We know we are searching for a summary table, so 

we select the frst result, S1501: “Educational Attainment” (see Figure 3.5).20 

20 Tables beginning with “S” are Subject Tables that focus on particular ACS subjects and include both estimates and percentages. More infor-

mation about Table IDs is available on the Census Bureau’s Web site, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/which-data-tool 
/table-ids-explained.html>. 

Figure 3.5.  Selecting an Educational Attainment Table in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

14   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
14  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
 
  
•  Next, select “Customize Table” (see Figure 3.6). 

Figure 3.6.  Customizing a Table in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

•  Select “Download” at the top of the window. Then, use the Download Tables window to check the box for 

the 2017 ACS 1-year data. Select “CSV” as the fle type and click on “Download” (see Figure 3.7). 

Figure 3.7.  Selecting the Survey Year(s) and File Type in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   15 
15 

What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
  
 
  
 
•  After the fles are prepared, click the “Download Now” button (see Figure 3.8). 

Figure 3.8.  Downloading Tables in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

•  This produces a ZIP fle. Open the ZIP fle to extract your table. The data are located in a fle with prefx 

“ACSST1Y2017.S1501_data_with_overlays” (see Figure 3.9). 

•  We repeat this process for all data.census.gov topics in the profle. 

Figure 3.9.  Portion of Data Table S1501 Downloaded From Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table S1501: “Educational Attainment,” <https://data.census.gov>. 

16   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
16  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
  
  
 
 
For data on commuting patterns, we access LEHD data, as follows: 

•  Go to the LEHD Web site at <https://lehd.ces.census.gov/research/>. 

•  Click “OnTheMap” on the left sidebar. This action will open a new window. 

•  Under the “Search” box, type “San Marcos” in the search bar, using the dropdown menu to select “Places” 

as the geography type. Then click “Search.” Be sure to select San Marcos, California, rather than San Marcos, 
Texas. Our selection refreshes the map view and zooms in to San Marcos (see Figure 3.10). 

•  Use the information bubble next to the location pin to select “Perform Analysis on Selection Area.” 

Figure 3.10.  Searching for a Geographic Area in OnTheMap 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, OnTheMap, <https://onthemap.ces.census.gov/>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   17 
17 

What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
 
 
 
 
  
•  The “Analysis Settings” window opens, allowing us to refne our search. 

·  Home/Work Area: Since we are interested in understanding commuting patterns, we select “Home.” 

This yields data based on San Marcos’ residents, rather than workers. 

·  Analysis Type: We are interested in understanding where residents work. We select “Destination” and 

“Places” as our destination type. 

·  Year: We select the most recently available data. 
· 

Job Type: Select “Primary Jobs.” 

•  Once all selections have been made, we click on “Go!” (see Figure 3.11). 

Figure 3.11.  Selecting Variables for Analysis in OnTheMap 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, OnTheMap, <https://onthemap.ces.census.gov/>. 

18   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
18  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
•  The page refreshes and populates our search results. We export the results by selecting “Detailed Report” 
under the left sidebar’s “Report/Map Outputs” bin and export the data in spreadsheet format (see Figure 
3.12). 

  Figure 3.12.  Creating a Detailed Report in OnTheMap 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, OnTheMap, <https://onthemap.ces.census.gov/>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   19 
19 

What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
 
Initial analysis was conducted in a spreadsheet, by sorting results from highest to lowest and comparing the city 
of San Marcos to the county, state, and nation. The resulting charts were created using a mixture of spreadsheets 
and visualization software. Figure 3.13 illustrates how poverty data were visualized in the dashboard. 

Figure 3.13.  City of San Marcos Community Profle: Poverty 

Source: San Marcos City Hall, San Marcos Regional Profle, <www.san-marcos.net/work/economic-development/community-profle>. 

20   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
20  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
  
Figure 3.14 shows an interactive fow map that was created to visualize the city’s commuting patterns. 

The City of San Marcos Community Profle and interactive dashboard were launched in the fall of 2017. Since 
then, the dashboard has been actively used by the city and its partners to better inform the region’s business 
community. In partnership with the city of San Marcos, the EDC plans on updating the profle and dashboard on 
an annual basis as data become available. Both products can be found on the city of San Marcos Web site.21 

21 San Marcos City Hall, San Marcos Community Profle, <www.san-marcos.net/work/economic-development/community-profle>. 

Figure 3.14.  City of San Marcos Regional Profle: Commuting Patterns 

Source: San Marcos City Hall, San Marcos Community Profle, <www.san-marcos.net/work/economic-development/community-profle>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   21 
What the Business Community Needs to Know  21 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
  
Case Study #2: Housing Afordability Gap 

Skill Level: Intermediate 
Subject: Median household income, housing afordability 
Type of Analysis: Analysis of national housing trends, combining American Community Survey (ACS) data with 
other sources 
Tools Used: ACS Public Use Microdata Sample, data.census.gov, and spreadsheet 
Authors: Svenja Gudell, Chief Economist, Zillow; and Aaron Terrazas, Senior Economist, Zillow 

In the years since the 2007–2009 Financial Crisis, there has been a boom in housing market data available to the 
public. Each month, Zillow—an online resource for home buyers and renters—produces and publishes over 100 
housing market data series—including median home values and median rents—aggregated at the national, state, 
metro, county, ZIP code, and neighborhood levels.22 

Zillow data provide a comprehensive view into the state of the U.S. housing stock, but Zillow’s economic 
research and data science teams also rely on critical data inputs from the U.S. Census Bureau to analyze the full 
implications of changing home values and rents for American households. One prominent example is how Zillow 
combines proprietary data on home values with household income data from the Census Bureau’s American 
Community Survey (ACS) to explore the share of income that the typical household spends on a monthly mort-
gage payment. (Zillow also produces a similar statistic for the share of income spent on rent.) 

By the middle of 2016—the most recent data available at the time of this writing—the typical American house-
hold earning the country’s national median income and buying the median-valued U.S. home could expect to pay 
15.5 percent of their income on a mortgage. In the nation’s priciest markets—such as San Jose, Los Angeles, and 
San Francisco—these shares exceed 40 percent. 

However, calculating housing afordability estimates based on median income and median home values by 
themselves does not provide a complete picture of afordability. Home values and incomes have consistently 
grown more at the top of the housing market and at the top of the labor market than at the bottom. Increasingly, 
afordability varies dramatically depending on a given buyer’s income level and the type of home they are trying 
to buy. 

To illustrate these diverging trends between more afuent and less afuent Americans, Zillow also computes 
mortgage afordability—the share of income spent on a mortgage—for the bottom, middle, and top one-third of 
households by income. This more granular (and, some would argue, more powerful) tier analysis is conducted by 
combining Zillow’s property-level data with ACS microdata. 

Calculating Mortgage Afordability 

To calculate mortgage afordability, Zillow frst estimates the mortgage payment for the median-valued home in 
a metropolitan statistical area (based on the Zillow Home Value Index for a given quarter) and the 30-year, fxed 
mortgage interest rate during that quarter (from the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey), assuming 
a 20 percent down payment. Zillow uses their internal property-level data to estimate mortgage payments, but 
data users can also access housing data—including home value and mortgage payment estimates—from the 
ACS. 

Data on median household income are from the Census Bureau’s ACS Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS). The 
PUMS fles allow data users to conduct a custom analysis of the ACS data using a sample of actual responses to 
the survey. They are much more fexible than the aggregate data available on data.census.gov, though the PUMS 
fles also require familiarity with statistical analysis software. 

With access to appropriate software—the most common are SAS, SPSS, STATA, R, and Python—using the 
ACS PUMS data is straightforward. Analysts without statistical software can create detailed cross tabulations 
using the microdata access tool on data.census.gov.23 The Census Bureau created a step-by-step guide on how to 
use this tool to produce custom estimates from the ACS 1-year PUMS fle.24 

22 Data are published at <www.zillow.com/data>. 
23 This tool is still under development and is available in beta form on the Census Bureau’s Web site: <https://data.census.gov/mdat/>. 
24 U.S. Census Bureau, Using Microdata Access, <https://www2.census.gov/data/api-documentation/using-microdata-access/microdata-

access-1-year-acs-pums.pdf>. 

22   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
22  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
To download PUMS data, go to the Census Bureau’s ACS PUMS Data “Accessing PUMS Data” Web page and 
select the desired timeframe for the PUMS data (see Figure 3.15). Data are available from the year 2005 to the 
present. You can select single-year or multiyear data. The example below uses data from the 2014 ACS 1-year 
fle. 

Figure 3.15.  ACS PUMS Data Repository 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Accessing PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 

/microdata/access.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   23 
What the Business Community Needs to Know  23 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
 
  
On the FTP site, click on “1-Year” to access the 2014 ACS 1-year PUMS fles (see Figure 3.16). 

Figure 3.16.  Selecting ACS PUMS File on the Census Bureau’s FTP Server 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Accessing PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/microdata/access.2014.html>. 

24   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
24  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
  
The next step is to download the data set by selecting “csv_hus.zip” (see Figure 3.17). PUMS fles on the Census 
Bureau’s FTP site are stored as ZIP fles. The naming convention for PUMS fles on the FTP server is based on 
three fle features: the fle format, the record type, and the state abbreviation. 

Figure 3.17.  ACS PUMS Downloads by Geography (Nation and States) and File (Population and Housing) 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, FTP server, <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums/2014/1-Year/>. 

•  File formats are comma-separated value (CSV) fles and SAS data sets for UNIX. 

•  Record types are housing fles (h) or person fles (p). Zillow uses the housing fle. 

•  State (or state equivalent) abbreviations are two letter labels such as “tx” for Texas and “dc” for District of 
Columbia. The abbreviation for the fle containing all records in the United States is “us.” Zillow uses the 
United States fle. 

After downloading the fle, Zillow loads the ACS data into R (software for statistical computing) to produce esti-
mates of monthly owner costs as a percentage of household income for households at diferent income levels. 
The PUMS Data Dictionary can help you fnd the variable needed for this analysis: HINCP (Household income in 
the past 12 months).25 

Using the HINCP variable to estimate median household income for households in the bottom one-third of the 
income distribution, Zillow then assumes that these households purchase a median bottom-tier home (i.e., 16.7th 
percentile of homes in a metro area) and then calculates the percentage of monthly income that household 
would have to spend to pay the mortgage.26 

25 U.S. Census Bureau, PUMS Data Dictionary, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata/documentation.html>. 
26 For median income used in the overall afordability analysis, Zillow chains the ACS income data forward using the Employment Cost Index 
(ECI), which is updated quarterly with a one-quarter lag. Income tier data are not directly published in the ECI, so to calculate tiers, Zillow relies 
on the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES), which is published with a 1-year lag. For this reason, tier data are only available through Q2 2016, but 
overall afordability data are available through Q2 2017. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   25 
What the Business Community Needs to Know  25 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
  
 
 
 
  
The key results from Zillow’s analysis are shown in Figure 3.18. Depending on a given buyer’s household income 
level and the kind of home they are trying to buy, afordability can vary dramatically. Nationwide, a buyer at the 
median household income in the bottom one-third of all incomes and who wants to buy a home valued in the 
bottom one-third of all homes would need to spend 23 percent of their household income on a mortgage as of 
Q2 2016, the latest quarter for which data were available at the time of this writing. A buyer in the top one-third 
of household incomes and who wants to buy a more expensive home in the top one-third of homes by value 
would only spend 11.5 percent of their income on a mortgage. 

Figure 3.18.  Mortgage Afordability by Income Tier 

Source: Svenja Gudell, “Housing Highs & Lows: How the Home Afordability Gap Between the Rich and Poor is Widening,” 
<www.zillow.com/research/afordability-2016q1-12763/>. 

A decade after the 2007–2009 Financial Crisis and associated housing market bust, there has been a prolifera-
tion of housing market data available to consumers and researchers. Census Bureau data, particularly from the 
ACS, are a critical complement to Zillow’s housing market data. 

In an era when the gap in net worth between higher- and lower-wealth households is increasing, medians or 
averages cannot tell the full story of the American housing market.27 Exploring within the distribution of home 
values and household incomes—analysis that is possible with Zillow’s property-level home values and the 
Census Bureau’s ACS PUMS data—allows for a much richer and more complete perspective on what is, for most 
Americans, their largest single asset.28 

27 U.S. Census Bureau, Gap Between Higher- and Lower-Wealth Households Widens, Census Bureau Reports, <www.census.gov/newsroom 

/press-releases/2014/cb14-156.html>. 

28 Zillow updates this analysis periodically. For the most recent data and analysis, see <www.zillow.com/research>. 

26   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
26  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
Case Study #3: USAA Potential Market Size Estimation

Skill Level: Introductory/Intermediate 
Subject: Housing 
Type of Analysis: Comparisons of American Community Survey (ACS) data over time, across demographic 
groups, and across states; identifying business market(s) 
Tools Used: Data.census.gov and spreadsheet  
Author: Rob Galbraith, Director of Underwriting Research, Property & Casualty Insurance Group, USAA

Rob Galbraith is a director of underwriting research with the Property & Casualty Insurance Company at USAA, 
a large financial services member-owned association that focuses on serving active duty military, veterans, and 
their families. The underwriting area is challenged with providing insurance to as many eligible members as pos-
sible while not taking on excessive exposure to natural hazards that could put the company at risk of bankruptcy. 
American Community Survey (ACS) data are used at USAA in conjunction with advanced analytics and predic-
tive modeling to identify segments to target for marketing three of its major lines of business: homeowners 
insurance, sold to those with owner-occupied homes; renters insurance, sold to those who are renting a dwelling 
from a landlord who owns the property; and rental property insurance, sold to those who are landlords renting 
their property to one or more tenants. ACS data are also used to track trends in owner- and renter-occupied 
housing to target marketing expenditures to achieve profitable growth.

Rob scans the documentation available for the ACS and learns that while single-year data are available for states 
and many large geographic areas, data for smaller areas with fewer than 65,000 people are only available in 
5-year tabulations (e.g., 2012–2016). He also learns that there is uncertainty—margin of error—associated with 
ACS estimates, particularly for smaller geographic areas and small population groups. For this example, Rob is 
interested in accessing ACS housing data at the state level.

•  Rob navigates to the U.S. Census Bureau’s ACS home page at <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs> and 

clicks on the “Data” link on the left side of the page (see Figure 3.19).

  Figure 3.19  Selecting Data From the ACS Home Page

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   27 
What the Business Community Needs to Know    27

U.S. Census Bureau•  Under the subheading “Data Tables and Tools,” he clicks on “Subject Tables” (see Figure 3.20). 

Figure 3.20.  Selecting ACS Subject Tables 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), <www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and-tools 
/subject-tables/>. 

28   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
28  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
  
• 

In the search box near the top right corner of the page, he types in “housing,” navigates to the second page 
of results, and then selects Table S2504: “Physical Housing Characteristics for Occupied Housing Units” (see 
Figure 3.21). When he clicks on this link, he is redirected to data.census.gov, the Census Bureau’s primary tool 
for accessing data from the ACS and many other Census Bureau data sets.

  Figure 3.21.  Searching for ACS Housing Tables

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), <www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and-tools 
/subject-tables/>.

•  Next, he clicks on “Customize Table” (see Figure 3.22).

•  The resulting table shows the United States as the default geography, so he selects “Geographies” to change 

the geography filter.

  Figure 3.22.  Customizing a Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.  

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   29 
What the Business Community Needs to Know    29

U.S. Census Bureau•  Next, he selects “State,” “All States in United States,” and then closes the window to view the results (see 

Figure 3.23). 

Figure 3.23.  Selecting Geographies in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

•  He selects the desired survey year by clicking on the current “Product” selection. For the purposes of this 
case study, he is using 2016 ACS 1-year estimates. The header should read “2016 ACS 1-Year Estimates 
Subject Tables” (see Figure 3.24). 

Figure 3.24.  Changing the Survey Year in Data.census.gov 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

30   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
30  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
  
  
 
 
•  He selects “Download” at the top of the window. 

•  Then, he uses the Download Tables window to check the boxes for the 2016 through 2010 1-year data. Rob 

downloads data for multiple years to assist with the selection of target markets to recommend. 

•  He selects “CSV” as the fle type and clicks on “Download” (see Figure 3.25). 

Figure 3.25.  Selecting ACS Data for Previous Years 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Rob opens the CSV fle and copies and pastes the owner-occupied and renter-occupied data for each state into 
a new table showing the data for the last 5 to 10 years (see Table 3.2). He can then use this table, compare it with 
internal USAA data showing the number of policies in force for each of the three lines of business, and compare 
the two tables to determine potential market size by state. Since the purpose of this analysis is to identify target 
market opportunities, the margin of error is not considered as a critical factor, as the goal is merely to gain rea-
sonable estimates of potential market size. 

If desired, this process can be replicated at a county level for further refnement of market segmentation. 

 Table 3.2.  Owner-Occupied Housing Units by State and Year 

State 

Alabama 
Alaska 
Arizona 
Arkansas 

California 

Colorado 
Connecticut 
Delaware 
District of Columbia 
Florida 

2012 

1,268,565 
159,427 
1,496,650 
757,722 

6,781,817 

1,278,158 
908,452 
241,050 
110,681 
4,724,428 

2013 

1,240,017 
156,107 
1,490,031 
739,987 

6,804,639 

1,291,945 
888,478 
243,047 
110,513 
4,672,482 

2014 

1,246,080 
156,006 
1,484,857 
744,318 

6,855,688 

1,302,533 
900,039 
245,808 
112,492 
4,693,821 

2015 

1,253,595 
159,922 
1,524,828 
746,000 

6,910,823 

1,322,618 
889,035 
249,681 
112,555 
4,760,071

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table S2504: “Physical Housing Characteristics for Occupied Housing Units.” 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data   31 
What the Business Community Needs to Know  31 

U.S. Census Bureau 
    
 
 
 
  
 
4. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES 

U.S. Census Bureau, What Is the American 
Community Survey? 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/about.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, State Data Center (SDC) 
Program 
<www.census.gov/about/partners/sdc.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: 
What All Data Users Need to Know 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/handbooks/general.html> 

U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics & 
Statistics Administration, 2015, New Report on Value 
of the American Community Survey 
<www.commerce.gov/news/reports/2015/05/value 
-american-community-survey-smart-government 
-competitive-businesses-and> 

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Releases 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data 
-releases.html> 

ACS Online Community 
<https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/> 

U.S. Census Bureau, Geography and ACS 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography 
-acs.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Tables and Tools 
<www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and 
-tools/> 

U.S. Census Bureau, Census Business Builder (CBB) 
<www.census.gov/data/data-tools/cbb.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, Data.census.gov Resources 
<www.census.gov/data/what-is-data-census-gov.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using the 
American Community Survey Public Use Microdata 
Sample Files: What Data Users Need to Know 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/handbooks/pums.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, Using the American Community 
Survey Summary File: What Data Users Need to 
Know 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/handbooks/summary-fle.html> 

32   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
32  What the Business Community Needs to Know 

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
