Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Journalists Need to Know

Issued February 2020

Acknowledgments

Linda A. Jacobsen, Vice President, U.S. Programs, Population Reference 
Bureau (PRB), and Mark Mather, Associate Vice President, U.S. Programs, 
PRB, drafted this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey Office. Other PRB staff who assisted in 
drafting and reviewing the handbook include Paola Scommegna and Lillian 
Kilduff. Some of the material in this handbook was adapted from the Census 
Bureau’s 2008 publication, “A Compass for Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What the Media Needs to Know,” drafted 
by William H. Frey, Brad Edmondson, and John P. DeWitt.

American Community Survey data users who provided feedback and 
case studies for this handbook include D’Vera Cohn, Joe Germuska, Paul 
Overberg, and Kristi Tanner.

Nicole Scanniello, Janice Valdisera, Gretchen Gooding, and Caleb Hopler, 
Census Bureau, contributed to the planning and review of this handbook.  

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of Albert 
E. Fontenot Jr., Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs, and 
James B. Treat, Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs, and 
Donna M. Daily, Chief, American Community Survey Office.

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the review and 
release of these handbooks include Jennifer Berkley, Naomi Evangelista, 
Justin Keller, Kirby Posey, and Michael Starsinic.

Linda Chen, Amanda J. Perry, Faye E. Brock, and Christine E. Geter 
provided publication management, graphics design and composition, 
and editorial review for print and electronic media under the direction of 
Janet Sweeney, Chief of the Graphic and Editorial Services Branch, Public 
Information Office. 

Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Journalists Need to Know

Issued February 2020

U.S. Department of Commerce 
Wilbur Ross, 
Secretary

Karen Dunn Kelley,  
Deputy Secretary 

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau,  
Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey  
Data: What Journalists Need to 
Know, U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, DC, 2020.

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Ron Jarmin, 
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer

Albert E. Fontenot Jr., 
Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs

James B. Treat, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office

Contents

1. ACS Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

2. How Journalists Use ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

3. Accessing ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

4. Geography and the ACS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

5. Case Studies Using ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

6. Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  iii 
What Journalists Need to Know  iii

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
This page is intentionally blank.

UNDERSTANDING AND USING AMERICAN  
COMMUNITY SURVEY DATA: WHAT 
JOURNALISTS NEED TO KNOW

Finding fresh data for news stories used to be difficult. 
With the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community 
Survey (ACS), data are now available on a wide range 
of topics, whenever they are needed. The ACS provides 
journalists with data they can use to strengthen news 
coverage and feature stories with up-to-date social, 
economic, housing, and demographic information 
about America’s communities. 

The ACS has become a valuable resource for data-
driven journalism—where the goal is to tell compelling 
stories that are grounded in data. This guide provides 
a brief overview of how journalists are using ACS data 
to make comparisons across geographic areas and 
population subgroups, support anecdotal evidence 
by providing a broader context, report on trends and 
reversals, and conduct research. It also describes some 

1. ACS BASICS

The American Community Survey (ACS) is a nation-
wide survey designed to provide communities with 
reliable and timely social, economic, housing, and 
demographic data every year. A separate annual sur-
vey, called the Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS), 
collects similar data about the population and hous-
ing units in Puerto Rico. The U.S. Census Bureau uses 
data collected in the ACS and the PRCS to provide 
estimates on a broad range of population, housing 
unit, and household characteristics for states, counties, 
cities, school districts, congressional districts, census 
tracts, block groups, and many other geographic areas.

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 3.5 million 
addresses, with survey information collected nearly 
every day of the year. Data are pooled across a calen-
dar year to produce estimates for that year. As a result, 
ACS estimates reflect data that have been collected 
over a period of time rather than for a single point in 
time as in the decennial census, which is conducted 
every 10 years and provides population counts as of 
April 1 of the census year.

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been col-
lected over a 12-month period and are available for 
geographic areas with at least 65,000 people. Starting 
with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is also produc-
ing “1-year Supplemental Estimates”—simplified ver-
sions of popular ACS tables—for geographic areas with 
at least 20,000 people.

important considerations when working with ACS 
data—particularly estimates for small geographic areas 
and small population groups. 

For more detailed information about the ACS—how 
to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, understand-
ing multiyear estimates, knowing which geographic 
areas are covered in the ACS, and how to access ACS 
data on the Census Bureau’s Web site—see the Census 
Bureau’s handbook on Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users 
Need to Know.1 

1 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American  
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

What Is the ACS? 

•  The ACS is a nationwide survey designed to 

provide communities with reliable and timely 
data every year.

•  Data are available for a wide range of geo-

graphic areas.

•  The annual sample includes 3.5 million 

addresses.

•  Data are pooled across years to produce esti-

mates for small geographic areas.

•  The ACS includes social, economic, housing, 

and demographic measures.

•  The ACS was designed to provide estimates 
of the characteristics of the population, not 
population counts. 

The Census Bureau combines 5 consecutive years of 
ACS data to produce multiyear estimates for geo-
graphic areas with fewer than 65,000 residents. These 
5-year estimates represent data collected over a period 
of 60 months. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  1 
What Journalists Need to Know  1

U.S. Census BureauTopics Covered in the ACS

The primary purpose of the ACS is to help Congress 
determine funding and policies for a wide variety of 
federal programs. In fact, ACS data help determine 
how more than $675 billion in federal funds are dis-
tributed to state and local areas each year.2 Because of 
this, the topics covered by the ACS are diverse. They 
include social, economic, housing, and demographic 
measures, which yield a wealth of information jour-
nalists can use to write better stories (see Table 1.1).3 
Various tables in the ACS have different “universes,” or 
base reference totals against which all other charac-
teristics are compared. Some tables cover population 
characteristics, while others cover housing character-
istics. Among the population tables, some cover the 
entire population (such as tables of the population by 
age), while some cover only a subset of the population 
(such as tables of employment status, which include 
data only for the population 16 years and older).

2 U.S. Census Bureau, “Uses of Census Bureau Data in Federal 

Funds Distribution,” 2017, <www.census.gov/library/working 
-papers/2017/decennial/census-data-federal-funds.html>. 

3 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Subjects 

Included in the Survey, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/subjects.html>. 

Many of these topics contain numerous subtopics. For 
example, “Journey to Work”—that is, commuting—
includes data on means of transportation (e.g., car, 
truck, or van; bus; bicycle; walking), travel time (both 
duration and time departed), and whether a carpool 
is used. Data on the foreign-born population include 
information about citizenship, place of birth, and year 
of entry. 

TIP: The ACS was designed to provide estimates of 
the characteristics of the population, not to provide 
counts of the population in different geographic areas 
or  population  subgroups.  The  ACS  can  tell  you  the 
share of young adults in Multnomah County, Oregon, 
who  bike  to  work,  but  is  not  intended  to  tell  you 
how  many  young  adults  live  in  Multnomah  County. 
For basic counts of the U.S. population by age, sex, 
race,  and  Hispanic  origin,  visit  the  Census  Bureau’s 
Population and Housing Unit Estimates Web page.*

* U.S. Census Bureau, Population and Housing Unit Estimates, 

<www.census.gov/popest/>.

  Table 1.1.  Population and Housing Data Included in American Community Survey Data Products

Social Characteristics
Ancestry
Citizenship Status
Disability Status1
Educational Attainment
Fertility
Grandparents as Caregivers
Language Spoken at Home
Marital History2
Marital Status
Migration/Residence 1 Year Ago
Period of Military Service
Place of Birth
School Enrollment
Undergraduate Field of  

Degree3

Veteran Status2
Year of Entry

Economic Characteristics
Class of Worker
Commuting (Journey to Work)
Employment Status
Food Stamps/Supplemental 

Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP)4

Health Insurance Coverage2
Income and Earnings
Industry and Occupation
Place of Work
Poverty Status
Work Status Last Year

Housing Characteristics
Computer and Internet Use5
House Heating Fuel
Kitchen Facilities
Occupancy/Vacancy Status
Occupants Per Room

Plumbing Facilities6
Rent
Rooms/Bedrooms
Selected Monthly Owner Costs
Telephone Service Available
Tenure (Owner/Renter)
Units in Structure
Value of Home
Vehicles Available
Year Householder Moved Into 

Unit

Year Structure Built

Demographics Characteristics
Age and Sex
Group Quarters Population
Hispanic or Latino Origin
Race
Relationship to Householder
Total Population

1 Questions on Disability Status were significantly revised in the 2008 survey to cause a break in series. 
2 Marital History, Veterans’ Service-Connected Disability Status and Ratings, and Health Insurance Coverage were added in the 2008 survey. 
3 Undergraduate Field of Degree was added in the 2009 survey. 
4 Food Stamp Benefit amount was removed in 2008. 
5 Computer and Internet Use was added to the 2013 survey. 
6 One of the components of Plumbing Facilities, flush toilet, and Business or Medical Office on Property questions were removed in 2016.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 

2   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
2   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
A good way to learn about the topics covered in the 
ACS is to explore the information available through 
the Census Bureau’s data.census.gov Web site.4 The 
Data Profiles in data.census.gov, which include the 
most frequently requested social, economic, housing, 
and demographic data, are especially useful for novice 
users who want to explore the range of topics avail-
able.5  

Journalists with expertise in using statistical packages 
may also be interested in the Public Use Microdata 
Sample (PUMS) files, which contain a sample of 
individual records of people and households that 
responded to the survey (stripped of all identifying 
information). The PUMS files permit analysis of specific 
population groups and custom variables that are not 
available through pretabulated ACS tables.6 

When Are ACS Data Released? 

ACS data are very timely because they are generally 
released during the year immediately following the 
year in which they are collected. The Census Bureau’s 
ACS Data Releases Web page provides information 
about upcoming ACS data releases, including sched-
uled dates, notes about new estimates or new guid-
ance, and technical information about geography and 
product changes. Users can also browse the notes 
from previous years.7  

The Census Bureau provides accredited journalists 
with advance access to ACS data. Media embargos are 
typically available 48 hours before the public release 
of ACS 1-year and 5-year published estimates. 

For more information about ACS data releases or 
to request an interview, please contact the Census 
Bureau’s Public Information Office by phone (301-763-
3030) or e-mail <pio@census.gov>. 

4 U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>. 
5 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Data Profiles, <https://data 

.census.gov/cedsci/table?q=dp>.

6 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 

7 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data  

Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums 
.html>. 

Releases, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data 
-releases.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  3 
What Journalists Need to Know  3

U.S. Census Bureau2. HOW JOURNALISTS USE ACS DATA 

Journalists use the American Community Survey (ACS) 
for a wide range of applications—from accessing a 
single statistic in data.census.gov to complex analyses 
of data for thousands of geographic areas. Many of the 
best news articles based on ACS data are written with-
out the restriction of a deadline, by searching through 
tables on the U.S. Census Bureau’s Web site to find the 
hidden stories in the data. This section provides some 
examples of how journalists use ACS data in their work. 

Using the ACS to Create Rankings or 
Identify Outliers

Journalists, bloggers, and others often use rankings 
to draw attention to geographic areas or population 
subgroups at the top or bottom of a distribution. For 
example, Chris Wilson at Time was interested in writing 
a story about occupations with high proportions of 
people working past retirement age. Using ACS data, 
he determined that tax preparers and members of the 
clergy had among the highest concentrations of work-
ers over age 65—at around 14 percent each.8  

Journalists interested in ranking population and hous-
ing characteristics across states can start with the 
Census Bureau’s Ranking Tables, which provide state-
level rankings for more than 80 key ACS variables.9  

The ACS can also be used to identify outliers—data 
points that stand out because they are very different 
from other data points in a ranked series of numbers. 
Emily Alpert Reyes at the Los Angeles Times explains 
why outliers are so appealing:

“Outliers are easy to find—and they can be truly 
fascinating stories. What places in your area have 
the lowest levels of Internet use? The most single 
parents? The most multiracial people? If the answers 
end up surprising you, your readers will probably 
also be interested—and want to know the reasons 
behind those surprising facts. It’s a great hook for 
traditional reporting—getting out and knocking on 
doors and finding the real people who are living 
those statistics.”10

8 Chris Wilson, Time, “The 50 Jobs Where People Work the  

Longest,” April 5, 2017, <http://time.com/4726657/retirement 
-age-jobs/>. 

9 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Ranking Tables, 

<www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and-tools/ranking 
-tables/index.php>. 

10 Emily Alpert Reyes, “Finding Stories in Census Data,” October 
2014, <https://source.opennews.org/articles/finding-stories-census 
-data/>. 

Examples of How Journalists Can Use 
ACS Data 

•  Using the ACS to create rankings or identify 
outliers: ACS data are frequently used to 
rank states, metropolitan areas, counties, 
and other geographic areas on key social 
and economic statistics.

•  Using the ACS to provide a broader context: 
ACS data are available for the nation, states, 
counties, and local communities, enabling 
journalists to put data for local areas into a 
broader context.

•  Using the ACS to report on trends and 

reversals: Data on a wide range of topics are 
updated every year, sharpening journalists’ 
understanding of key social, economic, hous-
ing, and demographic trends.

TIP: Although using ACS data to create rankings and 
identify outliers can be very appealing, journalists 
need to use caution when comparing ACS esti-
mates—especially those for small geographic areas 
or population subgroups. ACS estimates are based 
on only a sample, rather than all housing units and 
people, so they have a degree of uncertainty associ-
ated with them, called sampling error. In general, the 
larger the sample, the smaller the level of sampling 
error.

To help users understand the impact of sampling 
error on data reliability, the Census Bureau provides 
a “margin of error” for each published ACS estimate. 
The margin of error gives users a range of values within 
which the actual, “real-world” value is likely to fall. 

In general, data users should be careful in drawing con-
clusions about two ACS estimates because they may 
not be statistically different. 

TIP: In the case of state-level estimates and com-
parisons between large population subgroups, 
sizable differences between estimates are likely to 
be statistically significant. But for estimates based 
on smaller segments of the ACS sample, even large 
differences between estimates may not be statisti-
cally significant.

4   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
4   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
Testing for Statistical Significance 

Suppose a journalist is interested in writing a story 
about states with the highest median household 
income. He or she can use Table B19013: Median 
Household Income in the Past 12 Months (in 2016 
Inflation-Adjusted Dollars) to quickly generate a table 
of median household income values across states 
and the District of Columbia. In 2016, it appears that 
Maryland had the highest median household income 
($78,945), followed by Alaska ($76,440), New Jersey 
($76,126), and District of Columbia ($75,506). However, 
without conducting a statistical test, you cannot know 
whether the differences between these estimates are 
statistically significant.

The Census Bureau created a Statistical Testing Tool 
to help data users test whether ACS estimates are 
statistically different from one another. Data users can 
simply copy ACS estimates and their margins of error 
into the tool to get instant results of statistical tests. In 
this example, the results indicate that the 2016 median 
household income estimate for Maryland is not statisti-
cally different from that of District of Columbia (see 
Table 2.1).

For more information about margins of error, see the 
section on “Understanding Error and Determining 
Statistical Significance” in the Census Bureau’s 
handbook on Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to 
Know.11

11 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

  Table 2.1.  Median Household Income in 2016 in Selected States and the District of Columbia: Results From 
                the Census Bureau’s Statistical Testing Tool 

State

Median 
household 
income

Margin 
of error 
(±)

Maryland

$78,945

±737

l

d
n
a
y
r
a
M

X

y
e
s
r
e
J
w
e
N

f
o
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
D

a
k
s
a
A

l

i

a
b
m
u
o
C

l

s
t
t
e
s
u
h
c
a
s
s
a
M

t
u
c
i
t
c
e
n
n
o
C

i
i

a
w
a
H

e
r
i
h
s
p
m
a
H
w
e
N

i

i

a
n
g
r
i
V

i

a
n
r
o
f
i
l

a
C

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Alaska

$76,440

±2230 Yes

X

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

New Jersey

$76,126

±701 Yes

No

X

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

District of Columbia

$75,506

±3416 No

No

No

X

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Massachusetts

$75,297

±771 Yes

No

No

No

X

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Hawaii

$74,511

±1776 Yes

No

No

No

No

X

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Connecticut

$73,433

±1059 Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

X

Yes

Yes

Yes

New Hampshire

$70,936

±1422 Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

X

Yes

Yes

Virginia

$68,114

±748 Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

X

No

California

$67,739

±356 Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

X

X Not applicable.
Note: Cells labeled “No” indicate that the difference between two estimates is not statistically significant.
Source: Calculations from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Statistical Testing Tool, based on data from data.census.gov, Table B19013: Median  
Household Income in the Past 12 Months (in 2016 Inflation-Adjusted Dollars). 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  5 
What Journalists Need to Know  5

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
 
 
Using the ACS to Provide a Broader Context 

Many news articles rely on anecdotes, stories, and 
vignettes to create narratives that will resonate 
with a broad audience. For example, a recent story 
about childless cities in Iowa began with a journal-
ist’s description of an empty playground in the small 
town of Wiota, located in Cass County. Kyle Munson 
with the Des Moines Register used ACS data to put his 
anecdotal evidence into a broader context: In 2016, 
there were at least 280 Iowa cities with more people 
aged 65 and older than people under age 18, and there 
were five small towns with no children identified by the 
survey.12 (Cities and towns are classified as “Places” in 
the ACS data.)

ACS data could also be used to compare data for a 
local community, such as Wiota, with data for the 
broader county or state in which that community is 
located. For example, the percentage of the popula-
tion aged 65 and older in Wiota (29 percent) appears 
to be higher than the percentage in Cass County (21 
percent) and the statewide average in Iowa (16 per-
cent) (see Table 2.2), but results from the Statistical 
Testing Tool show that the estimate for Wiota is not 
significantly different from that of the county or state 
in which it is located.

  Table 2.2. Population Aged 65 and Older in Selected  

              Geographic Areas in Iowa: 2012–2016 

65 years and 
older (%)

Margin of 
error

Iowa

Cass County, Iowa

Wiota city, Iowa

15.8

21.4

29.1

0.1

0.1

16.5

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table DP05: ACS 
Demographic and Housing Estimates. 

The estimates shown in Table 2.2 cover the period 
from 2012 to 2016. This is because ACS estimates 
for areas with fewer than 20,000 people—like Cass 
County and Wiota—are produced only in the form of 
5-year estimates. However, for larger areas with at 
least 65,000 people (or 20,000 people in the case of 
1-year Supplemental Estimates) both 1-year and 5-year 

12 Kyle Munson, “Childless Iowa: More communities left with few, if 
any, kids,” Des Moines Register, Dec. 27, 2017, <www.desmoinesregister 
.com/story/news/local/columnists/kyle-munson/2017/12/27/childless 
-small-towns-iowa-struggle-aging-population/909256001/>. 

data are available, so data users need to choose which 
estimates to use.13 

When comparing ACS estimates across different 
geographic areas or population subgroups, data users 
should avoid comparing ACS single-year estimates 
with ACS multiyear estimates. That is, 1-year estimates 
should only be compared with other 1-year estimates, 
and 5-year estimates should only be compared with 
other 5-year estimates. In the example shown in Table 
2.2, only 5-year estimates are available for Cass County 
and Wiota city, while both 1-year and 5-year estimates 
are available for the state of Iowa. Thus, data users 
should compare 2012–2016 ACS 5-year estimates for 
Wiota with 2012–2016 ACS 5-year estimates for Iowa, 
even though more recent, single-year estimates for 
2016 are available for Iowa. 

For more information on comparing geographic areas, 
see the section on “Comparing ACS Data Across 
Geographic Areas” in the Census Bureau’s handbook 
on Understanding and Using American Community 
Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.14 

Using the ACS to Report on Trends and 
Reversals

Because the data are released annually, journalists can 
also use ACS data to identify year-to-year changes in 
population and housing characteristics. For example, 
Kristi Tanner, a journalist with the Detroit Free Press, 
used ACS data to look at income trends in Michigan. She 
reported that median household income in Michigan was 
$52,492 in 2016, up 1.8 percent from the previous year.15 
Figure 2.1 shows trends in median household income in 
Michigan from 2012 through 2016, from the Comparison 
Profiles in data.census.gov. Comparison Profiles show 
data side-by-side from different years, indicating where 
there are statistically significant differences between 
estimates.16 

In some cases, the data may show a continuation of 
trends from previous years, as in the example above. In 

13 Starting with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is also produc-

ing a series of 1-year Supplemental Estimates—simplified versions of 
popular ACS tables available for geographic areas with at least 20,000 
people. 

14 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

15 Kristi Tanner, “Census data: For a fourth year, Michiganders see 

incomes rise,” Detriot Free Press, Sept. 14, 2017, <www.freep.com 
/story/news/2017/09/14/michiganders-making-more-cash-even 
-detroit-new-stats-say/660518001/>. 

16 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Comparison Profiles, 

<https://data.census.gov/cedsci/table?q=cp>.

6   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
6   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.1.  Median Household Income in Michigan (in 2016 Dollars): 2012 to 2016

*Estimate is statistically different from 2016 estimate. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table CP03: Comparative Economic Characteristics. 

other cases, the data may show no change or a rever-
sal. For example, the child poverty rate in Colorado 
fell from 18.5 percent in 2012 to 16.9 percent in 2013—a 
significant year-to-year decline. Figure 2.2 shows the 
results from data.census.gov.

Comparing ACS data over time is straightforward 
when working with 1-year estimates for larger geo-
graphic areas and population subgroups. But using 
multiyear estimates to look at trends for small popu-
lations can be challenging because they rely on data 

Figure 2.2. Child Poverty Rates in Colorado: 2010 to 2013

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table S1701: Poverty Status in the Past 12 Months. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  7 
What Journalists Need to Know  7

U.S. Census Bureaucombined over a 5-year period. For example, com-
parisons of 5-year estimates from the 2011–2015 ACS 
and the 2012–2016 ACS are unlikely to show much 
difference because 4 of the years overlap; both sets of 
estimates include the same data collected from 2012 
through 2015.17 The Census Bureau suggests compar-
ing 5-year estimates that do not overlap—for example, 
comparing 2007–2011 ACS 5-year estimates with 
2012–2016 ACS 5-year estimates. 

There are additional challenges to making comparisons 
over time, such as changes made to geographic area 
boundaries, questionnaire items, and methods. For 
example, the Census Bureau made substantial changes 
to the 2008 ACS questions on labor force participa-
tion and the number of weeks worked. As a result, 
the Census Bureau recommends using caution when 
comparing 2008 and later labor force estimates with 
estimates from 2007 and earlier. 

Data users can learn about issues impacting ACS 
data—including changes in the survey design, col-
lection, and production procedures—in the “User 
Notes” section of the ACS Technical Documentation. 
The Census Bureau also provides information about 

important changes in the “New and Notable” informa-
tion that is provided with each new ACS data release.18  

The ACS was modeled after the long form of the 
decennial census, and journalists interested in long-
term trends can, in many cases, make valid compari-
sons between ACS and the 2000 Census (and earlier 
decennial census) estimates. However, differences in 
residence rules (defining who is included in a census 
or survey), universes (the total that is being counted), 
and time periods covered in the two surveys should 
be considered when making these comparisons. More 
information about these differences is available in 
the section on “Differences Between the ACS and the 
Decennial Census” in the Census Bureau’s handbook 
on Understanding and Using American Community 
Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.19 

For detailed guidance on comparing ACS and 2000 
Census data, visit the Census Bureau’s Web page on 
Comparing ACS Data.20  

17 While the interpretation of this difference is difficult, these 
comparisons can be made with caution. Users who are interested in 
comparing overlapping multiyear period estimates should refer to the 
section on “Understanding Error and Determining Statistical Signifi-
cance” in the Census Bureau’s handbook on Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html> for more information. 

18 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data 

Releases, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data 
-releases.html>. 

19 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

20 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  
Comparing ACS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/comparing-acs-data.html>. 

8   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
8   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau3. ACCESSING ACS DATA

Accessing ACS Data in Pretabulated Tables

The U.S. Census Bureau provides access to pretabu-
lated American Community Survey (ACS) tables 
through two main sources: data.census.gov and the 
ACS Summary Files. 

Data.census.gov is the Census Bureau’s primary tool 
for accessing population, housing, and economic data 
from the ACS, the Puerto Rico Community Survey, the 
decennial census, and many other Census Bureau data 
sets.21 Data.census.gov provides comprehensive access 
to pretabulated ACS data for a wide range of geo-
graphic areas, including states, cities, counties, census 
tracts, and block groups.22 

Data users can access detailed ACS tables by using 
data.census.gov’s “Advanced Search” feature, which 
allows users to conduct keyword searches, or search 
by using predefined topics, geographies, years, sur-
veys, or codes (see Figure 3.1).

21 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.
22 Block groups were available for the first time with the 2009–2013 

ACS 5-year data release. Previously, this geography level was only 
available in the ACS Summary Files.

Options for Accessing ACS Data 

•  Data.census.gov provides access to popula-
tion, housing, and economic data from the 
ACS and many other Census Bureau data 
sets.  

• 

Journalists with programming skills can use 
the ACS Summary Files to access multiple 
ACS tables for large numbers of geographic 
areas.  

•  The ACS Public Use Microdata Sample files 
allow users to create custom estimates with 
variables of their choosing. 

•  State Data Centers and Census Information 
Centers can provide help in accessing ACS 
data.

• 

Journalists who want access to ACS data 
prior to their public release can apply for 
embargo access.

Figure 3.1.  Advanced Search Feature in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  9 
What Journalists Need to Know  9

U.S. Census BureauFor information about accessing data from  
data.census.gov, see the section on “Accessing 
ACS Data” in the Census Bureau’s handbook on 
Understanding and Using American Community Survey 
Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.23  

Journalists with programming skills can use the ACS 
Summary Files to download and analyze ACS data.24 
The Summary Files are useful for skilled programmers 
who want to access multiple ACS tables for large num-
bers of geographic areas. Working with these files can 
be difficult, so the Census Bureau recommends that 
users check to see if their tables of interest are easily 
available for download through data.census.gov before 
using this data product.25 

Accessing ACS Microdata Files

For some purposes, journalists may need to access 
microdata (individual) records from the ACS Public Use 
Microdata Sample (PUMS) files. Accessible through 
the Census Bureau’s Web site, the ACS PUMS files 
offer nearly unlimited possibilities because data users 
can create their own estimates with variables of their 
choosing.26 Estimates created using the PUMS files may 
differ from pretabulated estimates available through 
data.census.gov because the PUMS files contain a sub-
set of the cases contained in the full ACS data.

In general, the PUMS files are more difficult to work 
with than data.census.gov because data users need to 
use statistical software to access the data. Also, the 
responsibility for producing estimates from PUMS and 
judging their statistical significance is up to the user. 
Once a data user learns how to work with PUMS, the 
story possibilities are endless. The smallest geographic 
area on these files is the Public Use Microdata Area 
(PUMA), which has a minimum population of 100,000 
(see the “Geographic Areas” section).

Many journalists access ACS microdata through 
the University of Minnesota’s Integrated Public Use 
Microdata Series (IPUMS) Web site, because it allows 
them to create custom tables online, without the use of 
statistical software.27 For example, Quartz’s Data Editor, 
Christopher Groskopf, used ACS and decennial census 
data from IPUMS to show that the number of people 

working full-time from home now exceeds the number 
of people who bike or walk to work combined.28  

Getting Help From Experts

Journalists with data analysis skills may be able to con-
duct research with ACS data themselves, but profes-
sional and academic demographers often are happy 
to give advice and provide data for free. City planning 
departments, school district planning offices, reference 
librarians, and college sociology departments are all 
good places to look for advice. Each state maintains an 
official State Data Center with knowledgeable staffers 
to answer your questions.29 There are numerous Census 
Information Centers spread out across the country that 
can provide valuable assistance.30 Data Dissemination 
Specialists from the Census Bureau also provide free 
training to individuals, organizations, government 
officials, and others to help them understand and work 
with ACS data.31  

Getting Advance Access to ACS Data

Journalists who want access to ACS data prior to their 
release to the public can apply for embargo access. 
Embargoed data are only available to “accredited 
media who give their chief attention to the gathering 
and reporting of news. Applicants must be employed 
or represent news organizations that regularly publish 
or broadcast a substantial volume of news material for 
public consumption.” For more information, see the 
Census Bureau’s Embargo Policy.32  

TIP: To learn more about the embargos and what 
will be new with upcoming releases, tune into the 
Census Bureau’s prerelease Webinars. They are typi-
cally held on Mondays during the week of a release. 
Please check the ACS Events page for updates.33  

For more general information about accessing ACS 
data, visit the Census Bureau’s Web site.33

23 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

24 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  
Summary File Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data 
/summary-file.html>. 

25 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  

Summary File Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs 
-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/summary-file-documentation 
.html>. 

26 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 

Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums 
.html>. 

28 Christopher Groskopf, Quartz, “More Americans now work full-

time from home than walk and bike to office jobs,” April 13, 2017, 
<https://qz.com/952961/remote-work-more-americans-now-work 
-full-time-from-home-than-walk-and-bike-to-their-jobs/>. 

29 U.S. Census Bureau, State Data Center (SDC) Program,  

<www.census.gov/about/partners/sdc.html>. 

30 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Information Centers (CIC),  

<www.census.gov/about/partners/cic.html>. 

31 U.S. Census Bureau, Library, Data Dissemination Specialists:  
Helping the Public Understand Data, <www.census.gov/library/video 
/data-dissemination-1.html>. 

32 U.S. Census Bureau, Newsroom, Embargo Policy, <www.census 

.gov/newsroom/embargo/embargo-policy.html>. 

27 University of Minnesota, Minnesota Population Center, IPUMS 

33 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Data,  

USA, <https://usa.ipums.org/usa/>. 

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data.html>.

10   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
10   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
4. GEOGRAPHY AND THE ACS

Many journalists use American Community Survey 
(ACS) data to report on key trends in states, counties, 
and cities. But ACS data are available for many other 
geographic areas, including school districts, con-
gressional districts, metropolitan areas, and “census 
designated places” (CDPs). A CDP is the U.S. Census 
Bureau’s term for a city, town, or village that lacks a 
separate municipal government but which otherwise 
physically resembles an incorporated place. 

Journalists interested in smaller geographic areas may 
want to access ACS data for census tracts—small sub-
divisions of counties that typically have between 1,200 
and 8,000 residents, with an optimum size of 4,000 
people. Census tract boundaries usually follow visible 
features but may follow governmental unit boundar-
ies and other nonvisible features in some cases. There 
are also more than 300 ACS data tables available for 
block groups—subdivisions of census tracts—that 
include between 600 and 3,000 people each. In the 
ACS, block groups are the smallest level of geography 
published. Data for census tracts and block groups are 
only available in the ACS 5-year data products. 

Public Use Microdata Areas 

Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs) are non- 
overlapping regions that partition a state and con-
tain at least 100,000 people each. State Data Centers 

What Geographic Areas Are Available?

•  ACS data are available for states, counties, 

cities, and a wide range of other geographic 
areas down to the block group level.

• 

Journalists interested in small geographic 
areas may want to explore ACS data for 
census tracts—small subdivisions of counties 
that typically have between 1,200 and 8,000 
residents.

•  Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs) are 

nonoverlapping regions that partition a state 
and contain at least 100,000 people each. 

•  One of the benefits of working with PUMAs 
is that, unlike counties, they all meet the 
population threshold that is needed to pro-
duce ACS 1-year estimates. 

define PUMAs in partnership with regional, state, local, 
and tribal organizations and agencies so the boundar-
ies reflect local knowledge about the regions.

The value of using PUMA geography becomes appar-
ent when looking at a state such as Kentucky (see 

Figure 4.1.  Availability of Single-Year ACS Estimates for Kentucky: 2016

Source: Population Reference Bureau analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 American 
Community Survey.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  11 
What Journalists Need to Know  11

U.S. Census BureauFigure 4.2.  Public Use Microdata Areas in Kentucky

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Public Use Microdata Sample Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles,  
<www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.html>.

Figures 4.1 and 4.2). The 2016 ACS includes data for 
only 13 of Kentucky’s 120 counties, but it also includes 
data for all 34 Kentucky PUMAs covering the entire 
state. 

PUMAs are also useful for examining densely popu-
lated areas in depth. For example, New York City is 
subdivided into 55 PUMAs, each with its own single-
year ACS estimates, which can be used to explore 
population and housing characteristics in the city’s 
Community Districts.34  

34 New York City Department of City Planning, Population  

Division, “New York City PUMAs and Community Districts,”  
<https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/planning/download/pdf/data-maps 
/nyc-population/census2010/puma_cd_map.pdf>. 

More information about the PUMS and other geo-
graphic areas in the ACS can be found in the section 
on “Geographic Areas Covered in the ACS” in the 
Census Bureau’s handbook on Understanding and 
Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know.35 

35 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

12   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
12   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau5. CASE STUDIES USING ACS DATA

Case Study #1: American Community Survey: Understanding the Basics

Skill Level: Introductory 
Subject: Understanding the basics 
Type of Analysis: Working with ACS tables; understanding 5-year estimates and margins of error 
Tool Used: Data.census.gov 
Author: Paul Overberg, Wall Street Journal

Too often journalists seek a simple fact, like a city’s population or poverty rate, and stumble into the endless 
stacks of the U.S. Census Bureau’s data library.

They find variations and cross-tabulations, overlapping data sets, and a geographical menagerie. It’s a hall of 
mirrors for anyone who cannot tell a “family” from a “household,” or “earnings” from “income” or how to parse 
through “Sex by Work Status in the Past 12 Months by Usual Hours Worked Per Week in the Past 12 Months by 
Weeks Worked in the Past 12 Months for the Population 16 to 64 Years.”

But journalists who spend some time to learn about the most important data behind those portals—the American 
Community Survey, or ACS—find that it pays rewards. This huge annual survey, the “every-year census,” is the 
crown jewel of U.S. social statistics. ACS data shape academic research, public discussion, policy, and law on 
many issues. The data are especially useful for journalists because they can be used to study many issues—like 
racial/ethnic diversity and representation—that are central to our pluralistic society and its promise of equality 
before the law. 

The ACS also drives a huge share of federal funding: An estimated $675 billion in federal funds are distributed to 
state and local areas each year based on census data. This in turn drives spending of hundreds of billions of dol-
lars each year in state funding, especially for Medicaid and business investment. 

Finally, the ACS is relevant to topics that seem unrelated to its content, like disease rates. This is because ACS 
provides some of the raw material for the population estimates that form the denominators for disease rates 
reported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other agencies.

The ACS operates on an industrial scale. Its staff produces hundreds of millions of facts each year from more than 
2 million housing units and more than 5 million people. It converts the raw data into 11 billion data points across 
80 kinds of geographic areas—more than 650,000 in all. 

To get a sense of how this factory works, let’s focus on a single ACS table that journalists often use—B19001: 
Household Income in the Past 12 Months (in 2016 Inflation-Adjusted Dollars) (see Figure 5.1). There is a lot to 
unpack here. Let’s take it in small steps.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  13 
What Journalists Need to Know  13

U.S. Census BureauFigure 5.1.  Sample Table From Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

This table is one of about 1,300 ACS Detailed Tables published each year. Most have names just like that: “B” 
followed by five digits. If you know that number, you can search for a table directly in data.census.gov. If you do 
not know the number, you can download a list of Table Shells from the Census Bureau’s Web site.36 This is a good 
reference to keep handy because most ACS data products are built from Detailed Tables. 

In most cases, each ACS table is published each year for any geographic area with at least 65,000 people. That 
includes every state, congressional district, metropolitan statistical area, lots of cities, and about a quarter of 
counties. It takes 5 years to accumulate enough responses so that the Census Bureau can publish the same table 
for less-populated areas. Those can range from small towns to even neighborhoods. They are also published each 
year, but each version covers the most recent 5 years. 

There is more to the 5-year data than that. The Census Bureau restates dollars to reflect their value in the most 
recent year. It applies the most recent poverty thresholds. It retallies data to reflect changes in geographic 
boundaries, which is critical when city or metro boundaries change. 

36 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Table Shells and Table List, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical 

-documentation/table-shells.html>.

14   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
14   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauRight under its name, this table declares: “Universe: Households.” This is key. The universe is the total that is 
being counted. In this case, it is “households,” which has a very specific meaning in the ACS. Most table universes 
are people, households, housing units, or subsets of those three. Some examples: 

• Mortgage status: “Owner-occupied housing units.”

•

•

•

•

People enrolled in school: “Population 3 years and over.”

Language spoken at home: “Population 5 years and over.”

Fertility rate: “Women 15 to 50 years.”

Highest level of education: “Population 25 years and over.”

Checking a table’s universe helps you sharpen the questions you are asking, narrow your search, and shape how 
you will describe the data.37 

For example, reporters often get confused between “household income” and “family income.” If you want to 
write about everyone in households, you would pick “household income.” Every occupied housing unit contains a 
household. That includes homes where just one person lives—28 percent of all households—as well as the homes 
of unrelated people, such as unmarried partners or roommates. “Family income” only covers families, which are 
two or more people related by blood, marriage, or adoption who live together. One measure of the difference 
can be seen in their median incomes. In 2016, the U.S. median household income was $57,617; the median family 
income, $71,062. 

What period does this table cover? It says income “in the past 12 months,” but do not call it “2016 income.” 
Confusingly, the 2016 1-year estimates cover the 23 months that end with November 2016. Why? Since the ACS 
interviews respondents monthly and asks for income received during the “past 12 months,” it ends up with 12 
different reference periods for income data collection in a single calendar year. The data are then put in terms 
of constant 2016 inflation-adjusted dollars by using the CPI-U-RS inflation factors from the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics.38 For example, in 2016 a respondent filling out the survey in February would have a reference period 
of February 2015 through January 2016. A respondent filling out the survey in October would have a different 
reference period, October 2015 through September 2016. The inflation-adjustments put these different reference 
periods in constant dollars; in this example, “2016 inflation-adjusted dollars.”

Do people really tell the Census Bureau their incomes? Mostly. But you can look it up and couch your words 
accordingly. The ACS comes with 100 question-specific, quality-checking tables whose numbers begin with 
“B99.” Table B99192 tells us that the Census Bureau did not have to allocate any income responses for 65 per-
cent of households in 2016.39 Another 16 percent of households had 100 percent of their income allocated. The 
remaining 19 percent had either partial answers that had to be completed or a dollar value of zero allocated. How 
does the Census Bureau know how to impute missing values? It uses a set of rules to pull information from other 
parts of the household’s form. Then, if necessary, it uses statistical methods to pull data from a similar household 
nearby. Not surprisingly, people leave income questions blank more often than almost any other type. Just 1.7 
percent of respondents leave the age and birthdate questions blank. 

Almost all ACS tables carry a margin of error for each number of interest. Journalists tense up about the word 
“error,” so let’s work through what it means here. It’s a term to describe variation inherent in random samples. The 
ACS is a very big, complex version of the scientific opinion polls that some news organizations sponsor. (Guess 
where the demographic benchmarks for those polls come from?) If you had enough money to poll 1,000 different 
random samples of the U.S. population, each would have a slightly different makeup. One might overrepresent 
women, another homeowners. If you kept polling and averaged the results, you would see a bell curve of results 
form for, say, the percentage of women. Most often, you would get 51 percent. A little less often, you would get 
50 percent or 52 percent. Most pollsters work at the 95 percent confidence level, which produces the familiar “±3 
percentage points.” That means that 19 times out of 20 polls (95 percent of the time), you’d get 51 percent of 
women, ± 3 percentage points. And one time out of 20, you’d get a sample outside that margin—women would 
represent less than 48 percent or more than 54 percent. 

The Census Bureau reports ACS margins of error at the 90 percent confidence level. Looking back to our table, 
7,595,040 households (± 40,371) had incomes of $200,000 or more. That means we can be pretty comfortable 

37 The Census Bureau produces a series of Appendix Tables for data users who want more information about ACS Detailed Tables, including 

table universes. The 1-year and 5-year appendixes can be downloaded as Excel files from the Summary File Documentation page at  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/summary-file-documentation.html>. 

38 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, CPI Research Series Using Current Methods (CPI-U-RS), <www.bls.gov/cpi/research-series/home.htm>. 
39 A commonly used approach to imputation (a statistical procedure to fill in missing responses) is known as hot-deck allocation, which uses a 

statistical method to supply responses for missing or inconsistent data from responding housing units or people in the sample who are similar. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  15 
What Journalists Need to Know  15

U.S. Census Bureauwriting “7.6 million” and saying they outnumber the “6.9 million” (6,924,913, ± 35,488) who made $150,000 to 
$200,000. See how handy rounding and error margins can be?

Instead of “margin of error,” think of this as a way to quantify the squishiness of the data. This is something that 
journalists deal with all the time—the ambiguity of the real world. Error margins just tell us how to precisely state 
the numbers and tune the words around them. 

It’s also important to remember that surveys, even massive ones like ACS, are better tools for expressing quan-
titative relationships than totals. You can report rounded ACS totals, but the main strength of the ACS lies in its 
ability to tell you a group’s share of the population, or the ratio of two groups in the population, or how a group’s 
share has shifted across time.

Inevitably, you will want to add or subtract ACS totals. Let’s say we want to know the number and share of 
households with more than $100,000 in annual income. It’s easy to just add the table cells, but to get the margin 
of error, you cannot just sum the same cells’ margins of error. The relevant formulas are available in the section 
on “Calculating Measures of Error for Derived Estimates” in the Census Bureau’s handbook on Understanding 
and Using American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.40 

Finally, journalists often wonder “How big an error margin is too big?” Statistics teachers say, “It depends.” They 
are right, but that is less than helpful. Consider a simpler measure of data squishiness called the coefficient of 
variation (CV). Without getting too deep into statistics: Divide the margin of error for the ACS number you care 
about by 1.645. The result is what is called its standard error. Divide that by the ACS number itself and multiply 
by 100. A CV of 10 percent does not seem too wobbly, but one of 50 percent probably is for most purposes.

Finally, journalists who do learn a bit about the ACS quickly appreciate that it offers honest answers. Too often, 
reporters get fed dubious numbers by people who are not keen to explain where they came from or how they 
were massaged. By comparison, ACS documentation spells out:

•  Exactly how each question was asked, including a facsimile of the questionnaire. 

•  Why each question was asked.

•  The share of surveyed households each year that actually responded to each question in any given area. For 

instance, in 2016, the Census Bureau managed to get 98 percent of people to provide their race but just 84 
percent of households to provide their income.

•  How often each question gets left blank, and how the Census Bureau fills in blanks. 

Like most people, the ACS becomes a better source as you learn more about what it knows and how to interro-
gate it. For example, you can ask questions that can’t be answered by any of its hundreds of tables if you know 
how to use its microdata to create a custom table.

So, the ACS can seem complicated, but it repays the time you invest in learning it with powerful ways to find and 
tell stories on many subjects and at many scales.

40 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users 

Need to Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

16   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
16   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #2: Reporting Poverty Trends in Michigan

Skill Level: Introductory 
Subject: Poverty trends 
Type of Analysis: Analyses of economic trends within and across large communities 
Tools Used: Data.census.gov and spreadsheet 
Author: Kristi Tanner, Detroit Free Press

Population and demographic estimates from the U.S. Census Bureau are a great resource for building data sets 
and writing about local demographic trends. American Community Survey (ACS) 1-year estimates are the most 
current data available for large geographic areas—65,000 residents or more—including cities, counties, metropol-
itan areas, and states. The ACS achieved full, nationwide implementation in 2005 for the household population 
and was expanded to cover the full population (including group quarters—such as college dormitories) in 2006. 

Included in the annual ACS release are Comparison Profiles. These reports cover hundreds of variables and com-
pare a current statistic to each year’s values up to 4 years prior; any changes that are statistically significant are 
highlighted in a separate column in the report.

To see if Michigan’s poverty rate changed last year, look at the latest Comparison Profile report:
•  Go to the data.census.gov Web site at <https://data.census.gov>.

•  Click on “Advanced Search” under the search bar. This will bring you to the Advanced Search page. 

•  Begin with the Geography filter. Select “Geography” in the navigation pane on the left side of the screen to 

display a list of available geographies.

•  Select “State” and then select “Michigan” from the “State” filter (see Figure 5.2).

Figure 5.2.  Geography Filter Selection in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  17 
What Journalists Need to Know  17

U.S. Census Bureau•  Next, choose the “Surveys” filter and select “ACS 1-Year Estimates Comparison Profiles.”

•  Both filters should appear in the “Selected Filters” at the bottom of the page. 

•  Next, click on “Search” in the lower right corner of the page (see Figure 5.3).

Figure 5.3.  Comparison Profile Filter Selection in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Comparison Profiles are organized by social, economic, housing, and demographic subject areas. Make sure you 
select the most recent data set available. When this analysis was initially conducted, the 2016 ACS 1-year esti-
mates were the most current.41 To find data on poverty and income, click on the link “Comparative Economic 
Characteristics” (see Figure 5.4).

41 ACS 5-year estimates are useful for small geographic areas and are available down to the block group level. 

18   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
18   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 5.4.  Choosing a Comparison Profile

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Next, Select “Customize Table” (see Figure 5.5).

Figure 5.5.  Customize Table in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  19 
What Journalists Need to Know  19

U.S. Census BureauCheck the data set, year, and geography on the report. Select the desired survey year by clicking on the cur-
rent “Product” selection. Again, for the purposes of this case study, we are using 2016 ACS 1-year estimates. The 
header should read “2016 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates” and the geography—“Michigan” (see 
Figure 5.6).

Figure 5.6.  Selecting the Survey Year

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

The poverty data are near the bottom of the table. If you want to expand the width of a column, hover over a 
column border in the shaded section at the top of the table and click and drag the border to the desired width. 
Poverty percentages are found below the “Percentage of Families and People Whose Income in the Past 12 
Months Is Below the Poverty Level” row.

In 2016, Michigan’s poverty rate for all residents was 15 percent, a drop of nearly 1 percentage point from 
2015. The asterisk in the column labeled “2016 - 2015 Statistical Significance” identifies a significant difference 
between the two estimates at a 90 percent confidence level. If there is no asterisk in the column between the 2 
comparison years, for example the poverty rate of individuals aged 65 years and over, you can interpret the cur-
rent year’s statistic as unchanged—in this case at about 8 percent in 2016 (see Figure 5.7).

20   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
20   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauIn 2016, Michigan’s poverty rate for all residents was 15 percent, a drop of nearly 1 percentage point from 
2015. The asterisk in the column labeled “2016 - 2015 Statistical Significance” identifies a significant difference 
between the two estimates at a 90 percent confidence level. If there is no asterisk in the column between the 2 
comparison years, for example the poverty rate of individuals aged 65 years and over, you can interpret the cur-
rent year’s statistic as unchanged—in this case at about 8 percent in 2016 (see Figure 5.7).

Figure 5.7.  Checking for Statistical Significance

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

By clicking on earlier years of this report, at the top of the page, you can see that the poverty rate for Michigan 
residents (all people) has been steadily declining since 2014. Figure 5.8 shows the results of this analysis, which 
was featured in a recent article in the Detroit Free Press.42

Figure 5.8.  Poverty Rates in the United States and Michigan: 2010 to 2016

Source: Author’s analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey.

42 Kristi Tanner, Detroit Free Press, “Census data: For a fourth year, Michiganders see incomes rise,” 2017, <www.freep.com/story 

/news/2017/09/14/michiganders-making-more-cash-even-detroit-new-stats-say/660518001/>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  21 
What Journalists Need to Know  21

U.S. Census BureauComparison Profiles are a great way to look for statistically significant differences in estimates over time. They 
allow you to say with a certain amount of confidence, in this case for individual poverty, that rates continue to 
decline.

To see how Michigan’s poverty trend compares to the U.S. poverty trend:

• Scroll to the top of the table and select “1 Geography” to open the geography filter. 

• Click on “Nation” and then select “United States.” 

• “United States” and “Michigan” should now be in your “Selected Geographies.”

• Click on the “Close” button in the lower right corner to view the table with your updated geography selec-

tions.

• Check year-over-year trends to see if the change in poverty for all U.S. residents is statistically significant.

If you need additional years of data, follow the same steps used to select 2016 estimates by clicking on your 
“Product” selection at the top of the page.

You can also use Comparison Profiles to compare trends across multiple geographic areas. To determine, for 
example, which large Michigan counties saw poverty rates drop in 2016, complete the following steps:

• Scroll to the top of the table and select “2 Geographies” to open the geography filter. 

• Click on “County” and then select “Michigan” from the list. 

• Select “All counties in Michigan.”43 

• Close the filter by clicking on the “Close” button in the lower right corner. 

• Scroll to the bottom of the table and click on the cell that says “All people” below the “Percentage of 

Families and People Whose Income in the Past 12 Months is Below the Poverty Level.” This highlights the 
desired row of data (see Figure 5.9).

Figure 5.9.  Highlighting a Row in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

43 There are 83 counties in Michigan. Since the ACS 1-year data set is selected, only counties with 65,000 or more residents will be available—

a total of 29. For statistics on less populous counties, use the ACS 5-year estimates.

22   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
22   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauUse the left/right arrow keys or the horizontal scroll bar at the bottom of the page to view the data for dif-
ferent counties in Michigan (see Figure 5.10). In Michigan, six counties had statistically significant changes in 
their poverty rate in 2016; four declined and two increased. Wayne County, the state’s largest county, saw a 2.1 
percentage -point decline in its poverty rate, from 24.8 percent in 2015 to 22.7 percent in 2016.

Figure 5.10.  Using the Horizontal Scroll Bar to Display Data for Selected  
                   Geographic Areas

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 

This example used Comparison Profile reports to analyze poverty trends for residents of Michigan and the  
United States, including identifying statistically significant changes in poverty rates by county. Data users work-
ing with other ACS estimates—such as those from the Detailed Tables—can test for significant difference among 
estimates by using the Census Bureau’s Statistical Testing Tool.44

44 U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Testing Tool, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/statistical-testing-tool.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  23 
What Journalists Need to Know  23

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #3: Census Reporter 
Skill Level: Advanced 
Subject: File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Table structure, geographic areas 
Type of Analysis: Working with large ACS data sets; repackaging ACS data 
Tools Used: PostgreSQL, FTP 
Author: Joe Germuska, Census Reporter Project Lead, Knight Lab at Northwestern University

While open government data have recently become trendy, the U.S. Census Bureau has been releasing troves of 
American Community Survey (ACS) data for years—through raw data files as well as pretabulated tables available 
through the data.census.gov Web site. The Census Bureau’s data.census.gov site is pure gold for journalists, but 
for novice users, it can be hard to mine.

Our team at Northwestern University’s Knight Lab created Census Reporter to make it easier for journalists to 
write stories using ACS data.45 With Census Reporter, we have the freedom to highlight certain data points and 
leave out others. We are applying the same principles that we have used to build news applications for a general 
public: we prefer clarity over completeness.

Although Census Reporter is not a substitute for all the detailed ACS data available on the Census Bureau’s Web 
site, it provides a good place to start for journalists who want to explore ACS data for a given topic or geographic 
area. Since it was launched in 2014, Census Reporter has been widely used by journalists looking for background 
information for their stories. For example, the site was recently used in stories by U.S. News & World Report 
(on the best states to live), The Texas Observer (on the effects of Hurricane Harvey on Port Arthur, TX), and 
Marketplace (on gentrification in a Los Angeles neighborhood called Highland Park).46  

We chose to focus on the ACS—as opposed to other federal data sources—because it provides the best combina-
tion of recent and local data. Census Reporter presents the latest ACS estimates for the nation, states, and many 
substate areas, down to the block group level. Charts, maps, and other data visualizations provide a friendly 
interface for navigating these data (see Figure 5.10). Users can also click on a “Show data” link below each chart 
to get more information about the underlying estimates and margins of error (see Figure 5.11). 

Figure 5.11.  Underlying Estimates of the Population by Age Group: 2016

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census Reporter, <https://censusreporter.org/>. 

45 Census Reporter, <https://censusreporter.org>. 
46 Casey Leins, U.S. News & World Report (March 1, 2017), “New Hampshire Benefits From Neighbor as a Leading State,” <www.usnews.com 

/news/best-states/articles/2017-03-01/new-hampshire-benefits-from-neighbor-as-a-leading-state>; Michael Barajas, The Texas Observer (March 
28, 2018), “Without State Aid, Advocates Worry Port Arthur Will Bleed Residents Long After Harvey,” <www.texasobserver.org/port-of-no 
-return/>; Marketplace, Wealth and Poverty Desk, “York & Fig: At the Intersection of Change,” <https://features.marketplace.org/yorkandfig/>. 

24   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
24   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauData Behind the Scenes

While Census Reporter is easy for journalists to use, it is also a good case study in how more advanced users can 
adapt ACS data to other purposes. The growing availability of open-source software has created new oppor-
tunities for journalists with programming skills to analyze and filter large data sets like the ACS to create new 
applications.

One of the most important goals behind the scenes at Census Reporter is making a flexible system to fetch ACS 
data so that the team at Census Reporter can quickly refresh their database and Web site. The amount of data 
that comes directly from the Census Bureau is huge and unwieldy for real-time queries, so our first experiment 
was to try loading these data into a set of “PostgreSQL” databases. PostgreSQL is a language that programmers 
can use to store, manipulate, and retrieve data.47  

We based our database schema on Lee Hachadoorian’s census-postgres project, giving us a good place to 
start.48 His scripts created a flexible schema to load and query all ACS tables for the 2006–2010 and 2007–2011 
ACS 5-year data sets. 

Since we were interested in comparisons over longer periods of time, we “forked” his project (created a copy of 
the code repository where we could make modifications without changing the original code) and added scripts 
to load data from additional ACS releases. 

To make the process of loading these data more repeatable and reliable, we wrote several scripts that are meant 
to be run on a server. After the scripts finish running, you end up with a PostgreSQL database with complete, 
nationwide ACS data split across several thousand tables queryable with SQL. Combining these data with the 
Census Bureau’s TIGER geographic data, we can make geographic, topical, and temporal queries against the 
ACS data.

Building the ACS Database

The data for Census Reporter are from the ACS Summary Files—a set of comma-delimited text files that contain 
all of the Detailed Tables for the ACS data releases—and were retrieved from the Census Bureau’s File Transfer 
Protocal (FTP) site.49 The FTP client allows users to download large numbers of files or entire folders containing 
the Summary File data for each ACS release. Beginning with the 2011 ACS, the Census Bureau has made it easier 
to download the entire Summary File for an ACS release in two “TAR” files (Tape Archive files used in UNIX-
based operating systems). Users should note that the TAR files are large and, depending on system constraints, 
may take some time to download.

Each data product (for example, 2012–2016 ACS 5-year data files) can be processed as one large file, but the 
data are horizontally partitioned by state and are vertically separated into “sequences” (chunks of data span-
ning 256 columns or fewer). A detailed explanation of the table structure and sequences can be found in the 
Summary File Documentation provided with each ACS data release.50  

The collection of geography and sequence files makes for a large number of tables that have to be bulk loaded 
if a user wants to work with multiple files or multiple geographic areas. Import routines assume that all ACS 
data are separated into small geographic areas (tracts and block groups) and large geographic areas (all other 
areas), but file names are reused for both types of geographic areas. To distinguish between small and large 
geography files, the import routines assume that the two types of files are separated into directories named 
“All_Geographies_Not_Tracts_Block_Groups” and “Tracts_Block_Groups_Only.” 

In each case, the parent directory name must match the name of the database schema where these data will 
be stored. For Census Reporter data work, we name the schemas after the data sets folder name on the Census 
Bureau FTP server (for example, “acs2016_5yr”).

47 PostgreSQL, <www.postgresql.org>. 
48 GitHub, PostgreSQL schema and import scripts for recent U.S. Census Bureau data, <https://github.com/leehach/census-postgres>. 
49 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data via FTP, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/data-via-ftp.html>. 
50 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Summary File Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical 

-documentation/summary-file-documentation.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  25 
What Journalists Need to Know  25

U.S. Census BureauThe resulting database is used to create the profile and comparison pages at our Census Reporter site. Since we 
did all this hard work to get Census Reporter started, we wanted to share our methods with others. We made the 
scripts available to the public for anyone else who wants to replicate the process or modify it for their own work 
(see Figure 5.12). You can find the scripts on the GitHub Web site.51   

Figure 5.12.  Census-Postgres Scripts on the GitHub Web Site

Source: GitHub, Scripts used to set up census-postgres on an Amazon EC2 instance, <https://github.com 
/censusreporter/census-postgres-scripts>.

51 GitHub, Scripts used to set up census-postgres on an Amazon EC2 instance, <https://github.com/censusreporter/census-postgres-scripts>. 

26   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
26   What Journalists Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
6. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

U.S. Census Bureau, What is the American Community 
Survey? 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/about.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov Resources  
<https://census.gov/data/what-is-data-census-gov 
.html> 

U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data:  
What All Data Users Need to Know 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/handbooks/general.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, State Data Center (SDC) Program  
<www.census.gov/about/partners/sdc.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, Census Information Centers (CIC)  
<www.census.gov/about/partners/cic.html>

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Releases 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data 
-releases.html>

Paul Overberg, How to Use the Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey Like a Pro 
<https://source.opennews.org/articles/how-use 
-census-bureau-american-community-survey/>

U.S. Census Bureau, Geography & ACS  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography 
-acs.html>

Census Reporter  
<https://censusreporter.org/>

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS Data Tables and Tools  
<www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and 
-tools/>

University of Minnesota, Minnesota Population Center, 
IPUMS USA  
<https://usa.ipums.org/usa/> 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  27 
What Journalists Need to Know  27

U.S. Census Bureau