An ofﬁcial website of the United States government Here’s how you know

(cid:0)

   BACK TO TOPICS PAGE [/ACS/WWW/ABOUT/WHY-WE-ASK-EACH-QUES…

We ask a question about whether a person is of Hispanic,

Latino, or Spanish origin to create statistics about this ethnic

group.

Local, state, tribal, and federal programs use these data, and

they are critical factors in the basic research behind numerous

policies, particularly for civil rights. Data on the Hispanic and

non-Hispanic populations are used in planning and funding

government programs that provide funds or services for

speciﬁc groups.

These data are also used to evaluate government programs and policies to ensure that they fairly and

equitably serve the needs of the Hispanic population and to monitor compliance with antidiscrimination laws,

regulations, and policies.

Though many respondents expect to see a Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish category on the race question, this

question is asked separately because people of Hispanic origin may be of any race(s). The Census Bureau
collects these data in accordance with the 1997 Ofﬁce of Management and Budget standards on race and

ethnicity. OMB requires federal agencies to use a minimum of two ethnicities in collecting and reporting

data: Hispanic or Latino and Not Hispanic or Latino. OMB deﬁnes "Hispanic or Latino" as a person of
Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin regardless of
race.

People who identify with the terms "Hispanic" or "Latino" are those who classify themselves in one of the
speciﬁc Hispanic or Latino categories listed on the American Community Survey questionnaire and various
Census Bureau survey questionnaires - "Mexican, Mexican Am., Chicano" or "Puerto Rican" or "Cuban" - as
well as those who indicate that they are "another Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin."

Your privacy concerns

We use your conﬁdential survey answers to create statistics like those in the results below and in the full tables that contain all th
data—no one is able to ﬁgure out your survey answers from the statistics we produce. The Census Bureau is legally bound to

strict conﬁdentiality requirements. Individual records are not shared with anyone, including federal agencies and law enforcemen
entities. By law, the Census Bureau cannot share respondents' answers with anyone, including companies, other federal agenci
and law enforcement.

Question as it appears on the form

We ask one question about a person's Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin to better understand
demographic characteristics.

(cid:0)

   VIEW QUESTION

Results from this question

We compile the results from this question to provide communities with important statistics about the Hispanic population and to
present other estimates by Hispanic or Latino origin. You can see some of these published statistics here for the nation, states,
and your community.

United States

Percent Hispanic or Latino (of any race)

19.0 percent [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates
Data Proﬁles/Demographic Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

Percent Mexican

11.3 percent [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates

Data Proﬁles/Demographic Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Percent Puerto Rican

1.8 percent [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Source: Latest ACS 5-Year Estimates
Data Proﬁles/Demographic Characteristics [https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDP5Y2023.DP05]

Ethnicity data help communities:

Ensure Equal Opportunity

We ask about the Hispanic or Latino origin of community members in combination with information about housing, voting,

language, employment, and education, to help governments and communities enforce antidiscrimination laws, regulations, and
policies. For example, data on the Hispanic population are used to:

Establish and evaluate the guidelines for federal affirmative action plans under the Federal Equal Opportunity Recruitment Program.
Monitor compliance with the Voting Rights Act and enforce bilingual election requirements.
Monitor and enforce equal employment opportunities under the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Identify segments of the population who may not be getting needed medical services under the Public Health Service Act.
Allocate funds to school districts for bilingual services under the Bilingual Education Act.

Understand Change

Researchers, advocacy groups, and policymakers are interested in knowing if people of Hispanic and non-Hispanic origin have t

same opportunities in education, employment, voting, and home ownership.

The National Science Foundation uses these data to provide information on the Hispanic population in the science and

engineering workforce.

Several federal agencies use these data to investigate whether housing or transportation improvements have unintended

consequences for the Hispanic population.

Data on the Hispanic population are used with age and language data to address language and cultural diversity needs in health

care plans for the older population.

History of Hispanic or Latino origin question

The question about a person's ethnicity originated with the 1970 Census. It was added to the ACS in 2005 when it replaced the

decennial census long form.

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

[https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

