Geography and the American Community Survey
What Data Users Need to Know

Issued February 2020

Acknowledgments

Linda A. Jacobsen, Vice President, U.S. Programs, Population Reference 
Bureau (PRB) and Mark Mather, Associate Vice President, U.S. Programs, 
PRB, drafted this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey Office. Other PRB staff who assisted in 
drafting the handbook include: Beth Jarosz, Lillian Kilduff, Kelvin Pollard, 
and Paola Scommegna.

Nicole Scanniello, Gretchen Gooding, and Charles Gamble III, Census 
Bureau, contributed to the planning and review of this handbook.  

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of  
Albert E. Fontenot Jr., Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs, 
James B. Treat, Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs, and 
Donna M. Daily, Chief, American Community Survey Office.

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the review and 
release of these handbooks include Fay Dahlquist, Sirius Fuller, Amanda 
Klimek, Laura La Kose, Janice Valdisera, and Tyson Weister.

Faye Brock, Linda Chen, and Christine Geter provided publication 
management, graphic design and composition, and editorial review for print 
and electronic media under the direction of Janet Sweeney, Chief of the 
Graphic and Editorial Services Branch, Public Information Office.

Geography and the  
American Community Survey
What Data Users Need to Know

Issued February 2020

U.S. Department of Commerce 
Wilbur Ross, 
Secretary

Karen Dunn Kelley,  
Deputy Secretary 

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau,  
Geography and the American 
Community Survey: What Data Users 
Need to Know  
U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC, 2020.

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Steven Dillingham, 
Director

Ron Jarmin, 
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer

Albert E. Fontenot Jr., 
Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs

James B. Treat, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office

Contents

1. Geographic Areas Covered in the ACS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2 

2. Geographic Boundaries, Vintages, and Frequency of Updates  . . . . . . . . . . . . .    12

3. Accessing and Mapping ACS Data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    13

4. Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21

Geography and the American Community Survey  iii 
What Data Users Need to Know    iii

U.S. Census BureauThis page is intentionally blank.

GEOGRAPHY AND THE AMERICAN COMMUNITY 
SURVEY: WHAT DATA USERS NEED TO KNOW

Geography plays an important role in all  
U.S. Census Bureau activities by providing the 
framework used to collect and publish data, 
including American Community Survey (ACS) 
estimates. Data users employ ACS data that are 
tabulated for a variety of geographic areas to 
produce detailed portraits and maps of social, 
economic, housing, and demographic character-
istics of America’s communities.

This guide provides an overview of geographic 
areas for which ACS data are available, special 
considerations in working with spatial data, and 
links to tools and other resources that data users 
can use to map ACS data.

What Is the ACS?

The ACS is a nationwide survey designed to pro-
vide communities with reliable and timely social, 
economic, housing, and demographic data every 
year. A separate annual survey, called the Puerto 
Rico Community Survey (PRCS), collects similar 
data about the population and housing units in 
Puerto Rico. The Census Bureau uses data col-
lected in the ACS and the PRCS to provide esti-
mates on a broad range of population, housing 
unit, and household characteristics for states, 
counties, cities, school districts, congressional 
districts, census tracts, block groups, and many 
other geographic areas.

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 
3.5 million addresses, with survey information 

collected nearly every day of the year. Data are 
pooled across a calendar year to produce esti-
mates for that year. As a result, ACS estimates 
reflect data that have been collected over a 
period of time rather than for a single point in 
time as in the decennial census, which is con-
ducted every 10 years and provides population 
counts as of April 1 of the census year.

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been col-
lected over a 12-month period and are available 
for geographic areas with at least 65,000 people. 
Starting with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is 
also producing “1-year Supplemental Estimates”—
simplified versions of popular ACS tables—for 
geographic areas with at least 20,000 people. 
The Census Bureau combines 5 consecutive years 
of ACS data to produce multiyear estimates for 
geographic areas with fewer than 65,000 resi-
dents. These 5-year estimates represent data col-
lected over a period of 60 months. 

For more detailed information about the ACS—
how to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, 
understanding multiyear estimates, knowing 
which geographic areas are covered in the ACS, 
and how to access ACS data on the Census 
Bureau’s Web site—see the Census Bureau’s 
handbook on Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users 
Need to Know.1

1 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/handbooks/general.html>. 

Geography and the American Community Survey  1 
What Data Users Need to Know    1

U.S. Census Bureau1. GEOGRAPHIC AREAS COVERED IN THE ACS

For reporting purposes, the U.S. Census Bureau divides 
the nation into two main types of geographic areas, 
legal and statistical. Legal areas are defined specifi-
cally by law, and include state, local, and tribal govern-
ment units, and some specially defined administrative 
areas like congressional districts. Many, but not all of 
these areas, are represented by elected officials. An 
example of a legal area is New York State.

Statistical areas are defined directly by the Census 
Bureau and state, regional, or local authorities for the 
purpose of presenting data. Examples of statistical 
areas include census designated places, census tracts, 
urban areas, and metropolitan statistical areas (such as 
the Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH Metropolitan 
Statistical Area). 

Geographic areas are organized in a hierarchy (see 
Figure 1.1). Larger units, such as states, include smaller 
units such as counties and census tracts. This structure 
is derived from the legal, administrative, or areal rela-
tionships of the entities. In the American Community 
Survey (ACS), block groups are the lowest (smallest) 
level of geography published. Block group data are 
only available in the ACS 5-year data products. The 
ACS does not produce data at the block level. 

In Figure 1.1, the geographic types connected by lines 
are nested within each other. For example, a line 
extends from counties to census tracts because a 
county is completely comprised of census tracts, and a 
single census tract cannot cross a county boundary. 

Figure 1.1. Hierarchy of Select Geographic Entities in the ACS

ZIP Code Tabulation Areas 
(ZCTA)**

School Districts

Congressional Districts

NATION

REGIONS

DIVISIONS

STATES

Counties

American Indian Areas/
Alaska Native Areas/
Hawaiian Home Lands

Urban Areas

Metropolitan and 
Micropolitan Areas

Places

Public Use Microdata Areas

Alaska Native Regional Areas

County Subdivisions

State Legislative Districts*

Census Tracts*

Block Groups*

* Five-year estimates only. 
** Five-year estimates only, first released in 2012 for the 2007–2011 ACS estimates. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

2   Geography and the American Community Survey 
2   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauIf there is no line joining two geographic types, then 
an absolute and predictable relationship does not exist 
between them. For example, although many places 
(cities and towns) are confined to one county, some 
places, such as New York City, extend over more than 
one county (see Figure 1.2). Therefore, an absolute 
hierarchical relationship does not exist between coun-
ties and places. 

Summary levels represent a geographic type, while 
GEOIDs are used to identify individual geographic 
areas. For example, State-County (summary level 050), 
represents the concept of a county within a state, 
while the GEOID for Madison County, Texas, is 48313 
(state code ‘48’ combined with county code ‘313’). 
These codes can be used to identify geographic areas 
in the ACS and many other public data sources.

Geographic Summary Levels and Codes 

There are two main types of identifiers that the Census 
Bureau uses for geographic areas: summary levels and 
geographic identifiers (GEOIDs). 

Summary levels range from very large reporting units, 
such as “State,” to much smaller reporting units such 
as “Census Tract.” Each summary level has an assigned 
three-digit, summary-level code to help programmers 
link each summary level to its appropriate use in a 

Figure 1.2. Counties in New York City

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, County Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles, <www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files 
/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.html>.

Geography and the American Community Survey  3 
What Data Users Need to Know    3

U.S. Census Bureautable, map, or other data summarization format. Here 
are some common summary levels used to identify 
types of geographic areas:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

010 Nation
020 Region
030 Division2
040 State
050 State-County
140 State-County-Census Tract
155 State-Place-County
160 State-Place
250 American Indian Area/Alaska Native Area/
Hawaiian Home Land
310 Metropolitan Statistical Area/Micropolitan
Statistical Area
500 State-Congressional District

Summary levels may cross between two or more 
geographic hierarchies to produce units that are only 
portions of geographic areas. For example, summary 
level “State-Place-County” crosses the “State-Place” 
hierarchy with the “State-County” hierarchy and may 
create units that cover only a portion of one county. 

A list of Cartographic Boundary File Summary Level 
Codes is available on the Census Bureau’s Web site.3 

Geographic Codes

The Census Bureau and other state and federal agen-
cies are responsible for assigning codes, or GEOIDs, 
to geographic areas. GEOIDs are numeric codes that 
uniquely identify each legal or statistical geographic 
area for which the Census Bureau tabulates data. 

GEOIDS are useful for sorting names of geographic 
areas for presentation purposes or analysis, merging 
ACS data with data from other sources, identifying 
areas as legally or statistically defined entities, and 
describing the classification category of the area. 

The Census Bureau uses several different code sets to 
identify geographic areas depending on area type and 
purpose. The most frequently used code systems are 
Federal Information Processing Series and American 
National Standards Institute codes.4

To identify a geographic area that is nested within a 
larger area, such as a state or the nation, one or more 
higher-level codes may be required. Census tract 
codes are unique within counties, and county codes 
are unique within states. Therefore, a complete set of 
state, county, and tract codes is needed to uniquely 
identify a particular census tract.

For example:

•

•

The unique GEOID for census tract 201 in Autauga
County, Alabama, is 01001020100.

The unique GEOID for census tract 201 in La Paz
County, Arizona, is 04012020100.

As shown in Table 1.1, a tract’s unique GEOID is created 
by combining its state, county, and census tract codes.

Some GEOIDs display additional information. For 
example, if you use the data.census.gov Web site 
to download ACS estimates for census tract 201 in 
Autauga County, Alabama, the GEOID is displayed 
as 1400000US01001020100, where “140” represents 
the summary level of the data, “0000” represents the 
two-digit geographic variant and the two-digit geo-
graphic component, “US” represents the United States, 
“01” represents the state of Alabama, “001” represents 
Autauga County, and “020100” represents the census 
tract.

For more information, visit the Census Bureau’s Web 
page on “Understanding Geographic Identifiers.”5 

Table 1.1. GEOID Structure

Name of census tract

State code

County code

Tract code

Census Tract 201, Autauga County, Alabama

Census Tract 201, La Paz County, Arizona

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

01

04

001

012

020100

020100

2 Divisions represent regional subdivisions such as “Middle Atlantic 

4 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Bureau Code Lists, American National 

Division.”

3 U.S. Census Bureau, Geography Program, Cartographic Boundary 

File Summary Level Codes, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/geography/technical-documentation/naming-convention 
/cartographic-boundary-file/carto-boundary-summary-level.html>. 

Standards Institute (ANSI), <www.census.gov/library/reference 
/code-lists/ansi.html>.

5 U.S. Census Bureau, Geography Program, Understanding 

Geographic Identifiers (GEOIDs), <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/geography/guidance/geo-identifiers.html>.

4   Geography and the American Community Survey 
4   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauPopulation Thresholds for Geographic 
Areas

Each year, the Census Bureau publishes ACS 1-year 
estimates for geographic areas with populations of 
65,000 or more. The 65,000-population threshold 
ensures that 1-year data are available for all regions, 
divisions, states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, 
congressional districts, Public Use Microdata Areas 
(PUMAs), many large counties and county equivalents, 
metropolitan and micropolitan statistical areas, cit-
ies, school districts, and American Indian areas.6 The 
1-year Supplemental Estimates—simplified versions of 
popular ACS tables—are also available for geographic 
areas with at least 20,000 people. These annual data 
provide policymakers, planners, business leaders, and 
others with a critical source of up-to-date information 
to plan for services such as transportation, medical 
care, housing, and schools.

For geographic areas with smaller populations, the 
ACS samples too few housing units to provide reliable 
single-year estimates. For these areas, several years 
of data are pooled together to create more precise 
multiyear estimates. Since 2010, the ACS has published 
5-year data (beginning with 2005–2009 estimates) for 
geographic areas down to the census tract and block 
group levels.7

6 PUMAs are collections of counties—or census tracts within coun-

ties—with approximately 100,000 people each. PUMAs do not cross 
state lines. PUMAs were initially adopted by the ACS because they 
were the only wall-to-wall geographic entities below the state level 
that met the minimum population threshold of 65,000 required to dis-
seminate ACS 1-year estimates.

7 For several years, the Census Bureau produced both ACS 3-year 

estimates (for areas with populations of 20,000 or more) and ACS 
5-year estimates (for all geographic areas). Starting with the 2014 data 
release, the 3-year products were discontinued, but 5-year estimates 
are still published each year.

Table 1.2 shows the type and number of geographic 
areas included in the ACS 1-year and 5-year products 
for 2017. For example, in 2017, ACS 1-year data were 
available for 837 counties (26 percent of all counties), 
while the remaining 2,383 counties (74 percent of all 
counties) received 5-year estimates. 

Data users interested in ACS estimates for areas with 
populations of 65,000 or more have a choice between 
the 1-year and 5-year data series. Which data should 
be used and why? The 1-year estimates for an area 
reflect the most current data but have larger margins 
of error (MOEs)—indicating less reliability or preci-
sion—than the 5-year estimates because they are 
based on a smaller sample. The 5-year estimates for 
an area have a larger sample and smaller MOEs than 
the 1-year estimates. However, they are less current 
because the larger samples include data that were 
collected in earlier years. The main advantage of using 
multiyear estimates is the increased statistical reliabil-
ity for smaller geographic areas and small population 
groups.

In the end, what makes the most sense is a mat-
ter of judgment regarding the balance between the 
period covered by an estimate and its level of reliabil-
ity or precision. The key is to strive to use only reli-
able estimates, where the period covered best suits 
the question at hand. For more information about 
ACS 1-year and 5-year estimates, see the section 
on “Understanding and Using ACS Single-Year and 
Multiyear Estimates” in the Census Bureau’s handbook 
on Understanding and Using American Community 
Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.8

8 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

Geography and the American Community Survey  5 
What Data Users Need to Know    5

U.S. Census BureauTable 1.2. Selected Geographic Areas Published in the 2017 American Community Survey 
(ACS) 1-Year and 5-Year Estimates

Areas receiving 1-year 
and 5-year estimates 

Areas receiving only 
5-year estimates1

Geographic areas

United States
Region
Division
States, the District of Columbia, and 

Puerto Rico

County or equivalent2
County subdivision3
Subminor civil division (Puerto Rico only)
Census tract
Block group
Place (incorporated places and  

census designated places)

Consolidated city
Alaska Native Regional Corporation
American Indian Area/Alaska Native 

Area/Hawaiian Home Land

Specified American Indian area—tribal 

census tract

Specified American Indian area-tribal 

census tract-tribal block group

Metropolitan/micropolitan statistical area
Principal city of metropolitan or micro-

politan statistical areas

Metropolitan division
Combined statistical area
Combined New England city and town 

area

New England city and town area
Principal cities of New England city and 

town areas

New England city and town area division
Urban area
Congressional districts, 114th Congress
Delegate district, 114th Congress (at 

large, District of Columbia)

Resident commissioner district, 114th 

Congress (at large, Puerto Rico)

State legislative district, upper chamber4
State legislative district, lower chamber4
Public Use Microdata Area
5-Digit ZIP Code Tabulation Area

Elementary school district

Secondary school district

Unified school district

TOTAL

Total 
number 
of areas
1
4
9

52
3,220
36,631
145
74,001
220,333

29,576
8
12

695

483

917
945

1,265
31
174

7
39

59
10
3,592
435

Number
1
4
9

Percent
100.0
100.0
100.0

52
837
224
N
N
N

614
N
3

13

N

N
518

399
31
171

7
25

19
10
435
435

100.0
26.0
0.6
N
N
N

2.1
N
25.0

1.9

N

N
54.8

31.5
100.0
98.3

100.0
64.1

32.2
100.0
12.1
100.0

Number
0
0
0

0
2,383
36,407
145
74,001
220,333

28,962
8
9

682

483

917
427

866
0
3

0
14

40
0
3,157
0

1

1

100.0

0

1
1,954
4,825
2,378
33,120

1,995

509

10,902

428,517

1
N
N
2,378
N

80

90

872

7,159

100.0
N
N
100.0
N

4.0

17.7

8.0

1.7

0
1,954
4,825
0
33,120

1,915

419

10,030

421,358

Percent
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
74.0
99.4
100.0
100.0
100.0

97.9
100.0
75.0

98.1

100.0

100.0
45.2

68.5
0.0
1.7

0.0
35.9

67.8
0.0
87.9
0.0

0.0

0.0
100.0
100.0
0.0
100.0

96.0

82.3

92.0

98.3

N Not available.
1 Geographic areas with populations of 20,000 or more also receive 1-year Supplemental Estimates, which are 

simplified versions of popular ACS tables. About three-fifths of counties receive 1-year Supplemental Estimates.

2 County equivalents include Alaska boroughs, municipalities, city and boroughs, and census areas; Louisiana 

parishes; Puerto Rico municipios; and independent cities in Maryland, Missouri, Nevada, and Virginia.

3 For 1-year estimates, qualifying minor civil divisions in 20 states only. For 5-year estimates, all county 

subdivisions.

4 Legislative session year 2016.
Note: Figures based on geographic area boundaries as of January 1, 2016, new and dissolved incorporations as 
of January 1, 2017, and population estimates from the July 1, 2017, Census Bureau Population Estimates. The Census 
Bureau does not publish ACS data for individual blocks.

6   Geography and the American Community Survey 
6   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauKey Geographic Areas in the ACS

Figures 1.3 through 1.7 show data users some of the 
key geographic areas available through the ACS: 
congressional districts, counties, PUMAs, and census 
tracts.

Congressional districts are redrawn after each cen-
sus for the purpose of electing the members of the 
U.S. House of Representatives.9 Each of Utah’s four 

9 Boundaries for congressional districts may change in between 
decennial censuses if a state initiative or court-ordered redistricting 
requires a change.

congressional districts (shown in Figure 1.3) includes 
approximately 750,000 people. ACS data on congres-
sional districts can be used to compare the character-
istics of the home districts of the 435 House members 
and how they have changed over time. 

Counties are also important because they are the 
primary legal subdivision within each state. ACS 1-year 
estimates are currently available for 10 of Iowa’s 99 
counties—those with populations of 65,000 or more in 
2017 (see Figure 1.4). Iowa has 33 counties with popu-
lations of at least 20,000 people that receive 1-year 

Figure 1.3.  Congressional Districts in Utah

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Congressional District Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles,   
<www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.html>. 

Geography and the American Community Survey  7 
What Data Users Need to Know    7

U.S. Census BureauSupplemental Estimates.10 The 66 counties in Iowa with 
fewer than 20,000 people only receive 5-year esti-
mates. 

The Census Bureau also divides each state into a series 
of PUMAs, each of which has a minimum population of 
100,000. PUMAs are constructed based on county and 
census tract boundaries and do not cross state lines. 
PUMAs provide nationwide coverage for 1-year and 
5-year data and can be aggregated to create custom 
geographic areas. PUMAs are updated after each 
decennial census.

Typically, counties with large populations are subdi-
vided into multiple PUMAs, while PUMAs in more rural 
areas are made up of groups of adjacent counties. 
PUMAs are especially useful for rural areas because, 
unlike counties, they meet the 65,000-population 
threshold required to provide ACS 1-year estimates. 
The value of using PUMA geography becomes appar-
ent when looking at a state such as Kentucky (see 
Figures 1.5 and 1.6). The 2017 ACS 1-year estimates 
include data for only 13 of Kentucky’s 120 counties, 
but they also include data for all 34 Kentucky PUMAs 
covering the entire state. 

10 Geographic areas with 65,000 or more people receive both 

1-year estimates and 1-year Supplemental Estimates.

Figure 1.4. Counties in Iowa by Population Size: 2017

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Congressional District Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles, <www.census.gov/geographies 
/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.html>. 

8   Geography and the American Community Survey 
8   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauFigure 1.5. Availability of ACS 1-Year Estimates for Kentucky: 2017

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2017 American Community Survey, 1 Year Estimates, Population Reference Bureau  
analysis of data. 

Figure 1.6. Public Use Microdata Areas in Kentucky

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Congressional District Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles, <www.census.gov/geographies 
/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.html>. 

Geography and the American Community Survey  9 
What Data Users Need to Know    9

U.S. Census BureauPUMAs are also useful for examining densely popu-
lated areas in depth. Data users who want to investi-
gate single-year estimates for subregions within large 
urban areas can do so by using PUMA-level data to 
obtain detailed descriptions of the areas. For example, 
the ACS releases estimates for the city of Chicago (in 
Cook County, Illinois), but Chicago is also subdivided 
into 19 PUMAs, each with its own ACS 1-year estimates.

Census tracts—small subdivisions of counties that 
typically have between 1,200 and 8,000 residents—
are commonly used to present information for small 

towns, rural areas, and neighborhoods. For example, 
in Vermont, there are currently 184 census tracts with 
data available through the ACS 5-year data products 
(see Figure 1.7). 

There are also more than 300 ACS data tables avail-
able for block groups—subdivisions of census tracts—
that include between 600 and 3,000 people each. In 
the ACS, block groups are the lowest (smallest) level of 
geography published. Block group data are only avail-
able in the ACS 5-year data products. 

Figure 1.7. Census Tracts in Vermont

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census Tract Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles, <www.census.gov/geographies 
/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.html>. 

10   Geography and the American Community Survey 
10   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauUser-Defined Areas

Beyond the standard legal and statistical geographic 
entities created by the Census Bureau, there are 
instances where analysts might want to show data for 
a custom, user-defined geographic area. For example, 
many states have regional planning commissions 
designed to foster cooperation among contiguous 
counties with similar needs. Figure 1.8 illustrates the 
boundaries of the Eastern Upper Peninsula Regional 
Planning & Development Commission, one of 14 
regional agencies in Michigan that serves the needs 
of the three easternmost counties of the state’s Upper 
Peninsula (Luce, Chippewa, and Mackinac counties). 

TIP: When aggregating ACS estimates across differ-
ent geographic areas or population subgroups, data 
users should avoid combining ACS 1-year estimates 
with ACS 5-year estimates. That is, 1-year esti-
mates should only be combined with other 1-year 
estimates, and 5-year estimates should only be 
combined with other 5-year estimates. When such 
derived estimates are generated, the user must also 
calculate the associated MOE. 

For more information about creating ACS estimates 
for custom geographic areas, see the section on 
“Calculating Measures of Error for Derived Estimates” 
in the Census Bureau’s handbook on Understanding 
and Using American Community Survey Data: What All 
Data Users Need to Know.11

Advanced users who are aggregating ACS estimates 
can use the Census Bureau’s Variance Replicate Tables 
to produce MOEs for selected ACS 5-year Detailed 
Tables.12 Users can calculate MOEs for aggregated 
data by using the variance replicates. Unlike available 
approximation formulas, this method exactly matches 
MOEs published on data.census.gov by including a 
covariance term. 

11 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>.

12 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Variance 

Replicate Tables, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data 
/variance-tables.html>.

Figure 1.8. Eastern Upper Peninsula Regional Planning and Development Commission: Michigan

Source: Eastern Upper Peninsula Regional Planning & Development Commission.

Geography and the American Community Survey  11 
What Data Users Need to Know    11

U.S. Census Bureau2. GEOGRAPHIC BOUNDARIES, VINTAGES, AND 
FREQUENCY OF UPDATES

The American Community Survey (ACS) publishes 
estimates using vintages (the latest available geo-
graphic boundaries). For the ACS 5-year estimates, 
the vintage is the last year of the multiyear period. 
For example, the 2017 ACS 1-year estimates and 
2013–2017 ACS 5-year estimates use the same vin-
tage (2017) of geographic boundaries. 

More specifically, ACS data generally reflect the 
geographic boundaries of legal areas as of January 
1 of the estimate year. For example, the 2017 ACS 
1-year estimates use the geographic area boundar-
ies in effect as of January 1, 2017, and the 2013–2017 
ACS 5-year estimates (covering January 1, 2013, to 
December 31, 2017) also use the geographic area 
boundaries effective as of January 1, 2017.

While geographic boundary changes are not com-
mon, they do occur, and those changes can affect a 
data user’s ability to make comparisons over time. 
For example, the city of Jurupa Valley, California, 
incorporated in July 2011. The U.S. Census Bureau 
published the first set of data for this city in 2012, 
and has produced updated data each subsequent 
year, but ACS data are not available for Jurupa 
Valley for 2011 and earlier years. The Census Bureau 
does not revise ACS data for previous years to 
reflect changes in geographic boundaries. 

Congressional districts, which are redrawn every 10 
years immediately following the decennial census, 
provide another example. Congressional district data 
from the 2012 ACS and later years reflect the new 
boundaries drawn after the 2010 Census, while ACS 
data for earlier years reflect the 2000 Census-based 
boundaries. Given the major changes to district 
boundaries after each census, a comparison of 

congressional district data between 2011 and 2012 is 
not feasible. 

Many statistical areas (like census tracts and block 
groups) are updated once per decade to reflect 
the most recent decennial census. Beginning with 
the 2010 ACS data products, most statistical areas 
reflect 2010 Census geographic definitions and 
boundaries. The 2009 and earlier ACS data prod-
ucts use mostly 2000 Census statistical definitions. 
Most legal areas (like counties, places, and school 
districts) are updated every year or every other 
year. Boundary changes for selected legal areas are 
reported to the Census Bureau through the annual 
Boundary and Annexation Survey.13 

TIP: In some cases, a geographic boundary may 
change, but the GEOID may remain the same, so 
data users need to pay attention to year-to-year 
changes to make sure the data are comparable over 
time. For example, the boundary of Bedford County, 
Virginia, was modified to add the former indepen-
dent city of Bedford (effective July 1, 2013).

For a complete schedule of legal and statistical 
area updates, see the Census Bureau’s Web page 
on Geography Boundaries by Year.14 Geographic 
changes for each ACS data release are recorded on 
the Census Bureau’s Table & Geography Changes 
Web page.15 

13 U.S. Census Bureau, Boundary and Annexation Survey (BAS), 

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/bas.html>.

14 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 

Geography Boundaries by Year, <www.census.gov/programs-
surveys 
/acs/geography-acs/geography-boundaries-by-year.html>. 

15 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Table 

& Geography Changes, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/technical-documentation/table-and-geography-changes.html>. 

12   Geography and the American Community Survey 
12   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau3. ACCESSING AND MAPPING ACS DATA

Data.census.gov is the Census Bureau's primary tool 
for accessing population, housing, and economic data 
from the American Community Survey (ACS), the 
Puerto Rico Community Survey, the decennial census, 
and many other Census Bureau data sets. 

Data.census.gov provides access to ACS data for a wide 
range of geographic areas, including states, cities, coun-
ties, census tracts, and block groups. For more informa-
tion about data.census.gov, view the Census Bureau’s 
release notes and answers to frequently asked questions 
about the site.16

16 U.S. Census Bureau, Data.census.gov: Census Bureau’s New Data 

Dissemination Platform Frequently Asked Questions and Release 
Notes, <https://data.census.gov/assets/releasenotes/faqs-release 
-notes.pdf>.

Other specialized tools, such as My Congressional 
District and Census Business Builder, provide users 
with quick and easy access to statistics for particular 
geographic areas and topics.17 More advanced users 
also have several options to access more detailed 
ACS data through the downloadable Summary File, 
the Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) files, or the 
Census Bureau’s Application Programming Interface 

(API).18

17 U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census.gov 
/mycd/>; Census Business Builder (CBB), <www.census.gov/data/data 
-tools/cbb.html>.

18 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Summary File Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data 
/summary-file.html>; American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums.html>; 
Developers, <www.census.gov/developers/>.

Figure 3.1. Data.census.gov Web Site

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Geography and the American Community Survey  13 
What Data Users Need to Know    13

U.S. Census BureauTopologically Integrated Geographic 
Encoding and Referencing (TIGER) Data 
and Products 

If you need to combine ACS estimates with spatial 
data, the TIGER products are a good place to start. 
TIGER products are spatial extracts from the Census 
Bureau's Master Address File (MAF)/TIGER database 
(MTDB), designed for use with GIS (geographic infor-
mation science/system) software. The data contain 
features, such as roads, railroads, and rivers, as well as 
legal and statistical geographic areas.19 

TIGER products include the following:

•

•

TIGERweb is a Web-based system that allows
users to visualize TIGER data in several ways such
as viewing spatial data online or streaming to
mapping applications.

TIGER/Line with Selected Demographic and
Economic Data are geodatabases (or shapefiles,
for some 2010 Census data) joined with selected
attributes (including population and housing unit
counts, demographic characteristics, such as sex
by age, and socio-economic characteristics such
as poverty) from the 2010 Census, 2006–2010
through current ACS 5-year estimates, and County
Business Patterns for selected geographic areas.

19 U.S. Census Bureau, Geography Program, TIGER Data Products 

Guide, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/guidance 
/tiger-data-products-guide.html>.

•

•

•

•

TIGER/Line Shapefiles provide legal boundaries,
roads, address ranges, water features, and more.20
These files do not include demographic informa-
tion but can be linked to data from demographic
tables using the GEOID.

TIGER/Line Geodatabases are spatial extracts
from the Census Bureau’s MTDB. The geodata-
bases contain national coverage (for geographic
boundaries or features) or state coverage (bound-
aries within state). These files do not include
demographic data, but they contain GEOIDs that
can be linked to the Census Bureau’s demographic
data.

Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles are small scale
(limited detail) mapping projects clipped to shore-
line. These files are designed for thematic map-
ping using GIS and are available for a limited set of
geographic types.

Keyhole Markup Language—Cartographic
Boundary Files are simplified representations
of selected geographic areas from the Census
Bureau’s MAF/TIGER system. These boundary files
are specifically designed for small-scale thematic
mapping using an online tool such as Google Earth
or Google Maps.

The Census Bureau produced a brochure that 
describes several of these products in more detail.21

20 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Blogs, Understanding Census Bureau 
Address Ranges, <www.census.gov/newsroom/blogs/research-matters 
/2016/04/understanding-census-bureau-address-ranges.html>. 
21 U.S. Census Bureau, Geography Program, TIGER Products 
Brochure, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/about 
/training/brochures.html>. 

14   Geography and the American Community Survey 
14   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauWorking With TIGERweb

TIGERweb applications allow users to select features 
and view their attributes, search for features by name 
or GEOID, and identify features by selecting them from 

a map (see Figure 3.2).22 The TIGERweb and TIGERweb 
Decennial applications provide a simple way to view 
TIGER data without GIS software and without down-
loading data. 

22 U.S. Census Bureau, TIGERweb, <https://tigerweb.geo.census 

.gov/tigerwebmain/TIGERweb_main.html>. 

Figure 3.2. TIGERweb

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, TIGERweb, <https://tigerweb.geo.census.gov/tigerwebmain/TIGERweb_main.html>. 

Geography and the American Community Survey  15 
What Data Users Need to Know    15

U.S. Census BureauData users can visualize geographic boundaries, such 
as PUMAs, using the TIGERweb online application.23 

TIGERweb map of PUMA boundaries in portions of 
Utah and other states in the Mountain West.

•  Go to the TIGERweb Web site at <https://tigerweb 

.geo.census.gov/tigerweb/>. 

•  Use the Zoom In feature on the map—by clicking 

on the individual plus sign or using the slide bar—to 
display a geographic area of interest. 

•  Then use the “Layers” menu to select “2010 Census 
Public Use Microdata Areas.” Figure 3.3 shows a 

The TIGERweb WMS and TIGERweb REST Services 
allow users to integrate Census Bureau data into their 
own GIS or custom Web-based applications.

For more information about using TIGERweb, see the 
TIGERweb User Guide.24

23 Ibid. 

24 U.S. Census Bureau, TIGERweb User Guide, <https://tigerweb 

.geo.census.gov/tigerwebmain/TIGERweb_apps.html>. 

Figure 3.3. Map of Public Use Microdata Areas in Portions of Idaho, Nevada, Utah, and Wyoming

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, TIGERweb, <https://tigerweb.geo.census.gov/tigerweb/>.

16   Geography and the American Community Survey 
16   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauWorking With TIGER/Line 
Geodatabases 

The Census Bureau’s TIGER/Line Geodatabase files 
provide access to ACS 5-year estimates that have been 
joined with frequently used geographic areas ranging 
from block groups to states. These prejoined geoda-
tabases include thousands of variables such as age, 
ancestry, citizenship, disability, educational attain-
ment, family structure, geographic mobility, household 
structure, housing (counts and characteristics), income, 
journey to work, language, marital status, nativity, 
occupation, poverty, race/ethnicity, school enrollment, 
and variables for a number of additional topics. Many 
of these variables are provided with cross tabulations 
by age, sex, or race/ethnicity.

Here are the steps to download TIGER/Line 
Geodatabases:

•  Begin at the “TIGER/Line with Selected 

Demographic and Economic Data,” page:  
<www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files 
/time-series/geo/tiger-data.html>.

•  Click on the tab corresponding to your data year 
of interest to view the list of available downloads 
(see Figure 3.4).

•  From that list, select a geographic area of interest 

and download the file to your workspace.

•  Open ArcMap (or other geospatial software) and 
select the “Add Data” option. Navigate to the 
geodatabase you downloaded. This will open a list 
of data items available to add to map. (You can 
use CTRL + Select to add more than one data item 
from the geodatabase.)

•  Once you have added the data, you can join data 

to polygons using the GEOID field.

Figure 3.4. TIGER/Line With Selected Demographic and Economic Data

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Geographies, TIGER/Line with Selected Demographic and Economic Data,  
<www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/tiger-data.html>.

Geography and the American Community Survey  17 
What Data Users Need to Know    17

U.S. Census BureauIn each geodatabase is a metadata table with a short 
name and a full description of each data element 
(see Figure 3.5). Metadata for each geodatabase are 
published in text online, or you can open your GIS 
software tool (for example, ArcCatalog) and review 
metadata there.25 In geodatabases, as with many other 

25 U.S. Census Bureau, Geography Program, TIGER/Line with 

Selected Demographic and Economic Data Record Layouts,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/technical 
-documentation/records-layout/tiger-line-demo-record-layouts.html>.

downloadable ACS data products, joined variables 
from data tables are short names beginning with a let-
ter. The short names in the metadata file correspond to 
the data element field headings in the detailed tables 
of each geodatabase.

Figure 3.5. Metadata Example for County Geodatabase

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, TIGER/Line with Selected Demographic and Economic Data Record Layouts, County 
Metadata, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/technical-documentation/records-layout/tiger-line-demo 
-record-layouts.html>.

18   Geography and the American Community Survey 
18   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauLinking Other ACS Data to TIGER/Line 
Shapefiles

In some cases, users may not be able to find the ACS 
data they need in the Selected Demographic and 
Economic Data geodatabases (for example, users work-
ing with ACS 1-year data). A more comprehensive set 

of ACS data tables is available through data.census.gov 
and the ACS Summary File. 

Experienced users can access aggregate ACS data by 
using the “Advanced Search” feature in data.census 
.gov, which allows users to conduct keyword searches 
or search by predefined topics, geographies, years, 
surveys, or codes (see Figures 3.6 and 3.7). 

Figure 3.6. Advanced Search in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>.

Figure 3.7. Advanced Search Filters in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>.

Geography and the American Community Survey  19 
What Data Users Need to Know    19

U.S. Census BureauData users looking for a particular table can also use 
the search bar on the data.census.gov home page to 
search by Table ID. For example, typing “B01001” into 
the search bar generates a list of relevant Sex by Age 
tables (see Figure 3.8).

After the required ACS estimates from data.census.gov 
have been downloaded, they can be linked to TIGER 
shapefiles using the GEOID. 

Data users with programming skills and access to 
statistical software can use the ACS Summary File to 
download and analyze ACS data from the same set of 
Detailed Tables that are available in data.census.gov. 
The Summary File provides access to aggregate ACS 
data and includes information for geographic areas 
down to the block group. It is useful for skilled pro-
grammers who want to access multiple ACS tables for 
large numbers of geographic areas. 

TIP: The ACS Summary File is geared toward more 
advanced data users, so the Census Bureau recom-
mends that users check to see if their tables of inter-
est are easily available for download through data.
census.gov before using this data product. 

The Summary File documentation provides users with 
all the information they need to access and process 
these data, including survey methods and links to 
sample SAS (statistical software) programs for pro-
cessing the data files.26 The ACS Summary File can be 
downloaded as zipped files from the Census Bureau’s 
FTP site.27 Developers can also access Summary File 
data through the Census Bureau’s APIs.28 

After the required ACS Summary File data have been 
downloaded, they can be linked to TIGER shapefiles 
using the GEOID. For instructions, see the Census 
Bureau’s: Instructions on Joining the ACS Summary 
File to the TIGER/Line Shapefiles.29

26 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Summary File Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/technical-documentation/summary-file-documentation.html>. 

27 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data via 

FTP, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/data-via-ftp 
.html>.

28 U.S. Census Bureau, Developers, Available APIs, <www.census 

.gov/data/developers/data-sets.html>.

29 U.S. Census Bureau., Instructions on Joining the ACS Summary 
File to the TIGER/Line Shapefiles, <https://www2.census.gov/programs 
-surveys/acs/summary_file/2014/documentation/tech_docs/ACS_SF
_TIGERLine_Shapefiles.pdf>.

Figure 3.8. Searching by Table ID in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>.

20   Geography and the American Community Survey 
20   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau4. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

Understanding and Using American Community 
Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/handbooks/general.html>

This handbook provides an overview of the America 
Community Survey (ACS) to help data users under-
stand the basics of the survey, how the data can be 
used, how to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, and 
how to access ACS data.

Geography and ACS 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography 
-acs.html>

This Web page includes information about changes in 
geographic boundaries in the ACS, key concepts and 
definitions, and reference materials.

Gazetteer Files 
<www.census.gov/geographies/reference-files/time 
-series/geo/gazetteer-files.html>

The U.S. Gazetteer Files provide a listing of all geo-
graphic areas for selected geographic area types. The 
files include geographic identifier codes, names, area 
measurements, and representative latitude and longi-
tude coordinates. 

Hierarchy Diagrams 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography 
/guidance/hierarchy.html>

The hierarchy of census geographic entities displays 
the relationships between legal, administrative, and 
statistical boundaries maintained by the U.S. Census 
Bureau.

Census Geocoder  
<https://geocoding.geo.census.gov/>

The Census Geocoder is an address look-up tool that 
converts an address to an approximate coordinate 
(latitude/longitude) and returns information about the 
address range that includes the address and the cen-
sus geography the address is within.

Census Data API User Guide 
<www.census.gov/data/developers/guidance/api-user 
-guide.html>

The purpose of this user guide is to instruct develop-
ers and researchers on how to use the Census Data 
Application Programming Interface to request data 
from Census Bureau data sets.

How to Use ACS Geodatabase Files and ArcMap 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/training-presentations/acs-geodatabase.html>

This Webinar covers background information about 
the ACS, as well as how to join ACS data with a layer 
of geography by downloading a geodatabase file, 
opening the file in ArcMap, and joining the ACS data 
table to a feature class.

U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov: Census Bureau’s 
New Data Dissemination Platform Frequently Asked 
Questions and Release Notes 
<https://data.census.gov/assets/releasenotes/faqs 
-release-notes.pdf>

Data.census.gov is the main platform to access data 
and digital content from the Census Bureau, created 
based on overwhelming feedback to streamline the 
way you get data.

Related Sites  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography 
/about/related-sites.html>

Many outside groups, such as other federal agencies 
and academic institutions, have mapped census data 
and can provide additional tools to data users. The 
Census Bureau compiled a list of sites that either map 
Census Bureau data or help you map census data.

Geography and the American Community Survey  21 
What Data Users Need to Know    21

U.S. Census Bureau