American Community Survey (ACS) Concepts and Terms Quick Guide 

This quick guide provides concise definitions of common ACS terms and concepts for beginners 
to advanced data users. Click to expand each section. Select hyperlinked terms and concepts to 
navigate to more information. Scroll to the end of this document to view a list of ACS acronyms.  

The American Community Survey (ACS) is an 
ongoing survey conducted by the U.S. Census 
Bureau throughout the 50 states, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico (PRCS). The ACS 
provides vital information about our nation and 
helps determine how trillions of dollars in 
federal funds are distributed each year.  

If you’re new to the ACS, refer to the 
ACS Information Guide to learn about 
ACS basics, how data are collected, and 
FAQs. For additional ACS support and 
learning opportunities, jump to the Where 
can I get help accessing and using ACS 
data? section. 

When Should I Use ACS Data? 

•  You need up-to-date data on the social, economic, demographic, or housing 

characteristics of America’s communities.  

•  You need information about U.S. social and economic trends, from 2005 to the present. 
•  You need data on the characteristics of the U.S. population by age, race, ethnicity, tribal 

affiliation, or other groups.  

•  You need data for different geographies, from block groups to the nation and/or 

everything in between.  

What Topics Are Covered in the ACS? 
The subjects collected through the ACS can be grouped into four main characteristics:  

•  Social (e.g., educational attainment and marital status) 
•  Economic (e.g., employment and income) 
•  Housing (e.g., monthly owner costs and vehicles available) 
•  Demographic (e.g., age and race) 

For a full list of ACS subjects, refer to Subjects Included in the ACS. 

What Geographies Are Available in the 
ACS? 

•  ACS data are available for geographic areas 
ranging in size from the nation and broad 
geographic regions to cities, towns, county 
subdivisions, and block groups.  

•  Many geographies “nest” within each other. For 
example,  counties are made up of census tracts, 
and census tracts can’t cross county boundaries. 

1 

 
 
•  Other geographies don’t nest within larger areas. For example, New York City extends 

over five counties.  

 Refer to Geography & ACS for more guidance on the 160+ geographies available in the ACS. 

What Are 1-year and 5-year ACS Estimates? 

•  ACS data are pooled across a calendar year and reflect a period of time—1 year or 5 

years—rather than a single point in time.  

•  The longer the time period, the larger the sample and, therefore, the more reliable the 

estimates.  

Estimate 
Time Period 
Available 
Geographies 

Currency 
Precision 

1-year estimates 
12 months 
Areas with populations of 
65,000 + (or 20,000+ for 
Supplemental Estimates) 
More current 
Less precise 

5-year estimates 
60 months 
All areas 

Less current 
More precise 

To learn more about ACS estimates and best practices, refer to When to Use 1-year or 5-year 
Estimates. 

Which Tools Can I Use to Access ACS Data? 
Data.census.gov is the best place for most data users to access ACS data. However, many other 
tools are available for more advanced users to access ACS data in multiple formats: 

•  Tables: ACS data are presented in tables for several topics. Each table is labeled with an 

ID. See Table Shells and Table List for a full list of ACS Detailed Tables. 

2 

 
•  Application Programming Interface (API): A 
tool you can use to create simple queries to 
access ACS data through an internet browser.  
•  Summary File: A text file that contains all ACS 

Detailed Tables. 

•  Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS): A 

subsample of the ACS that contains individual 
records that you can analyze to create custom 
estimates and tables. 

•  Microdata Access Tool (MDAT): A website 
with dropdown menus and filters to create 
custom ACS estimates and tables, based on 
PUMS data. 

•  File Transfer Protocol (FTP): A directory with 

downloadable ACS data files. 

Understanding ACS Table IDs 

Each ACS table is labeled with an 
ID. This ID is made up of 
characters representing up to five 
different elements. For example, 
“B” tables are base tables that 
include the most detailed estimates 
on all topics for all geographies. 

•  Open-source Software packages: Open-source software such as Python and R. Libraries 
such as tidycensus are collections of pre-written code that you can use to access ACS 
data more efficiently. The Census Bureau developed a Github page to share repositories 
of code for working with ACS data developed by data users. 

•  Tiger/Line: Geographic shapefiles pre-joined with ACS estimates in a geodatabase 

format. 

Other Census Bureau websites provide access to ACS data for specialized uses: My 
Congressional District, My Tribal Area, Census Business Builder, OnTheMap for Emergency 
Management, Community Resilience Estimates, and QuickFacts. 

Other ways to access ACS data: Federal Statistical Research Data Centers (FSRDC) and 
Custom Tables. 

Refer to Table Shells and Table List for ACS table shells without the estimates or margins of 
error filled in.  

How Can I Assess the Accuracy of ACS Data?   
All ACS data are estimates and subject to error. Here are some common terms that describe how 
the Census Bureau protects respondent confidentiality while ensuring the accuracy of the data: 

•  Measures of statistical reliability: Statistical measures such as margins of error (MOE) 
and confidence intervals (CI) assess the likelihood that ACS estimates differ from the 
actual population. 

•  Item allocation: A statistical method for replacing missing survey responses using 

answers from similar housing units or respondents. 

3 

 
 
 
 
•  Population controls: The number of housing units and select populations in the ACS are 

from the Population Estimates Program’s official population estimates. 

Calculating Custom ACS Estimates and Margins of Error (MOEs): ACS data users can 
calculate estimates and their associated margins of error for multiple geographies or population 
subgroups. For step-by-step instructions, navigate to section 8 of the Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know.  

Why Are Some ACS Data Unavailable? 
Data users may sometimes encounter tables or estimates that are not available due to the ACS’s 
data release rules, which ensure published data are high quality and safeguard respondents. For 
more information about data release rules, refer to the Census Bureau’s ACS Publishing Rules. 

Commonly Misunderstood Concepts and Terms 

Ancestry: Ethnic origin or descent, “roots,” or heritage. This question is answered regardless of 
a respondent’s race, country of origin, or Hispanic origin.  

Citizenship: The ACS includes questions about citizenship, place of birth, and year of entry into 
the United States; it does not ask about unauthorized immigration or immigrants’ legal status.  

Family vs. Subfamily: Both families and subfamilies must include two or more people living 
together, related by birth, marriage, or adoption. A family must include a householder, while 
subfamilies do not.  

Group Quarters: Group Quarters (GQs) include places like college dorms, treatment centers, 
skilled nursing facilities, group homes, military barracks, correctional facilities, and facilities for 
people experiencing homelessness. People living in GQs usually are not related to each other.  

Home Value: Home values in the ACS are self-reported based on the owners’ understanding of 
the value rather than a professional assessment or sale price. 

Household vs. Family Household: A household includes all the people who occupy a housing 
unit. A family household must include a family, but this could include a subfamily and/or 
unrelated persons. The number of family households is equal to the number of families in the 
ACS, but family households may also include unrelated people living with them. 

Householder: One person in each household is designated as the householder—typically the 
person in whose name the home is owned, being bought, or rented and who is listed on Line 1 of 
the survey questionnaire.   

Own vs. Related Children: An own child is a never-married child under age 18 who is a son or 
daughter by birth, a stepchild, or an adopted child of the householder; a related child is any child 

4 

 
under 18 years old who is related to the householder by birth, marriage, or adoption (including 
both ever- and never-married children. Children, by definition, exclude people under age 18 who 
maintain households or are spouses or unmarried partners of householders. 

Poverty: The Current Population Survey is the official source of national poverty estimates and 
is preferred for national analysis; the ACS may be useful for subnational analyses. 

Race and Hispanic Origin: Though many respondents expect to see a Hispanic origin category 
on the race question, this question is currently asked separately. People of Hispanic origin may 
be of any race(s). However, the Census Bureau is working on a plan to add a new, combined 
race/ethnicity question to future censuses and surveys. 

Rooms: Rooms must be separated by built-in archways or walls extending at least 6 inches and 
going from floor to ceiling. They are not bathrooms, porches, balconies, foyers, halls, or 
unfinished basements. 

Sex: The 2024 ACS questionnaire includes categories for “male” and “female” but the Census 
Bureau is testing a new ACS question on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity (SOGI). 

Telephone Service Available: In the 2019 ACS and later questionnaires, telephone service 
includes “cell phones, land lines, or other phone devices.”  

Tenure: Owner/renter status of occupied housing units. 

Type of Internet Access: Service as “dial-up,” “DSL,” cable modem,” fiber-optic,” or other 
categories. This question does not ask about the companies that provide internet access. 

Type of Internet Access: Service as “dial-up,” “DSL,” cable modem,” fiber-optic,” or other 
categories. This question does not ask about the companies that provide internet access. 

Rural, urban, metropolitan, and micropolitan are terms that represent different geographic 
designations:  
Rural/urban 
Defined by Census Bureau 
Rural areas include all people, 
housing, and territory that are 
not within urban areas. 
Updated every decennial 
census 
Delineated primarily by 
population density 

Metropolitan/micropolitan 
Defined by Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 
Areas outside of metropolitan and micropolitan areas are 
not synonymous with rural areas 

Updated with Census Bureau’s latest population 
estimates 
A collection of counties with a core urbanized area and 
adjacent counties according to commuting patterns. 

5 

 
Zip Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTA) vs. Zip Codes: ZCTAs are areal representations of the 
point-based ZIP Codes built using 2020 Census tabulation blocks. 

For a full list of subject definitions, refer to Code Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy. Another 
resource describes Why We Ask Each Question in the ACS.  

Making Comparisons With ACS Data 

Data users may want to compare ACS estimates to analyze patterns or trends. Here are some dos 
and don’ts: 

•  Do compare 1-year estimates with 1-year estimates, and 5-year estimates with 5-year 

estimates. Don’t compare 1-year estimates with 5-year estimates. 

•  Do compare non-overlapping datasets (for example, compare 2005-2009 ACS 5-year 
estimates to 2010-2014 ACS 5-year estimates). Don’t compare overlapping estimates. 

•  Do compare ACS and Decennial Census data on basic characteristics (sex, age, race, 

Hispanic origin, and homeowner status).  

•  Do be aware of changes in question wording, coding, and geographic boundaries that 

may affect the comparability of data over time. 

Find more comparison guidance here: Comparing ACS Data. 

Where Can I Get Help Accessing and Using ACS Data? 

For questions about using ACS data, please contact the ACS data user support team at 
acso.users.support@census.gov or 1-866-805-5993. 

The Census Bureau’s ACS Office offers extensive documentation, forums, training 
opportunities, and partnerships to help data users with ACS data:  

User Guides and Training Materials: 

•  ACS Information Guide: This is a comprehensive beginner’s guide to the ACS. If you 

are new to using ACS data, start here.  

•  Handbooks: Downloadable PDF handbooks with specific how-to instructions and/or 

case studies, including a glossary of terms.  

•  Discovering the ACS: A comprehensive course with 4 video modules and Census 

Academy course completion certificate  

•  Data Gems: A series of "how-to" videos for data users. 
•  Census Academy: Courses, webinars, and tutorials for all U.S. Census Bureau data 

products. 

•  Ask Census: Up-to-date FAQs about the ACS program, data collection, and research 

with messaging from Census Bureau support representatives. 

6 

 
Opportunities to Connect with Other Data Users: 

•  ACS Online Community: Forum for data users to share messages, materials, and 

announcements related to ACS data, methods, and events.  

•  ACS Data User Conferences: A biannual conference that shares information among 
data users about key ACS data issues and applications and provides networking 
opportunities. 

•  ACS Data User GitHub: Repositories of code developed by data users who use 

statistical software. 

•  Slack Census developer’s forum: Messaging app for software developer data users. 

Ask the Experts: 

•  Data Dissemination Specialists:  

A team of trainers from all six regional offices that work directly with individuals, 
organizations, government officials, and others to help them understand Census Bureau 
data. 

•  State Data Centers (SDC): Partnership between the Census Bureau and all 50 states, 
D.C., Puerto Rico, and Island areas to make data available through state agencies, 
universities, libraries, and regional and local governments. 

•  Census Information Centers (CICs): A network of nonprofit groups and national and 

community-based organizations that provide Census Bureau data in accessible formats to 
underserved populations. 

For more information, refer to Guidance for Data Users. 

ACS Acronyms 

Acronym 
ACS 
ACSO 
AIAN 
API 
BG 
CDP 
CI 
CIC 
CP 
CV 
DAS 
DP 
FSRDC 

Meaning 
American Community Survey 
American Community Survey Office  
American Indian Alaskan Native   
Application Programming Interface 
Block Group  
Census Designated Place  
Confidence Interval 
Census Information Centers 
Comparison Profiles  
Coefficient of Variation  
Disclosure Avoidance System 
Data Profiles  
Federal Statistical Research Data Centers 

7 

 
FTP 
GCT 
GEOID 
GQ 
MDAT 
MOE 
OMB 
PEP 
PRCS 
PUMA 
PUMS 
SDC 
TIGER 
ZCTA 

File Transfer Protocol   
Geographic Comparison Tables 
Geographic Identifier  
Group Quarters 
Microdata Access Tool 
Margin of Error 
Office of Management and Budget  
Population Estimates Program 
Puerto Rico Community Survey 
Public Use Microdata Areas  
Public Use Microdata Sample 
State Data Centers 
Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing 
Zip Code Tabulation Areas (pronounced zik-tahs)  

8 

 
 
