United States Census Bureau | An official website of the United States Government

Change to Citizenship Edits
for People Born in
American Samoa

September 2019

The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 legislates that people born in American Samoa are non-

citizen U.S. nationals unless at least one of their parents were U.S. citizens. While the American
Community Survey (ACS) is not collected in American Samoa, individuals from American Samoa who are

living in stateside U.S. or Puerto Rico may be included in data collection for the ACS or Puerto Rico

Community Survey (PRCS). The wording of the citizenship question and response categories for

stateside decennial and ACS forms have not historically included explicit instructions for non-citizen U.S.
nationals.

Internal data edit and processing procedures for citizenship in the decennial census and ACS/PRCS have

always classified respondents who reported being born in American Samoa as U.S. citizens under the
second response category “Yes, born in Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or Northern

Marianas." Consistent with these procedures, the help text for the ACS was amended in 2011 to add the

instruction: "[a]lthough not listed, if the person was born in American Samoa, mark 'Yes, born in Puerto

Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or Northern Marianas' box."  The ACS Subject Definitions document
also was modified to add that "People born in American Samoa, although not explicitly listed, are

included in the second response category."

For 2018, it was decided that including U.S. nationals under the second response category in the
citizenship question was not sufficiently supported by the specific wording of the question, as the

question does not address the status of U.S. nationals. For this reason, edit and processing procedures

have been modified to no longer assign individuals reporting their place of birth as American Samoa into

the second response category for citizenship, and instructions for respondents will not include explicit
directions as to which citizenship category to indicate. Valid citizenship categories for respondents from

American Samoa are now “Yes, born abroad of U.S. citizen parent or parents,” “Yes, U.S. citizen by

naturalization,” or “No, not a U.S. citizen.” Researchers should note that this change may result in

significant differences between the 2017 and 2018 citizenship distribution among those reporting their
place of birth as American Samoa. Users should also note that pre-2018 data will not have edited

assignments retroactively modified to reflect these changes.

Others in Series

User Notes

Changes to ACS Group Quarters
Small Area Estimation

September 2012

[/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/user-notes/2011-
01.html]

User Notes

2013 Language Estimates

September 2014

[/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/user-notes/2013-
06.html]

User Notes

Changes to Occupation, Industry, &
Class of Worker Editing Procedures

September 2015

[/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/user-notes/2015-
01.html]

Page Last Revised - October 28, 2021

