Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives 
Need to Know

Issued March 2021

Acknowledgments

Linda A. Jacobsen, Vice President, U.S. Programs, Population Reference 
Bureau (PRB), and Mark Mather, Associate Vice President, U.S. Programs, 
PRB, drafted this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey Office. Other PRB staff who assisted in 
drafting and reviewing the handbook include: Beth Jarosz, Lillian Kilduff, 
Kelvin Pollard, Paola Scommegna, and Marissa Slowey. 

American Community Survey data users who provided feedback and case 
studies for this handbook include: Carole Cochran, Amber Ebarb, John 
Murphy, Cheryl Penny, Sarah Pytalksi, Amadeo Shije, and Malia Villegas.

Nicole Scanniello and Gretchen Gooding, Census Bureau, contributed to the 
planning and review of this handbook.  

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of Albert E. 
Fontenot Jr., Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs, Deborah M. 
Stempowski, Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs, and Donna M. 
Daily, Chief, American Community Survey Office.

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the review and 
release of these handbooks include:

Dee Alexander, Mark Asiala, Karen Battle, Akenabah Begay, Judy Belton, 
Jennifer Berkley, Patrick Cantwell, Gary Chappell, Eunha Choi, Joshua 
Coutts, Bryce Davenport, Barbara Downs, Sirius Fuller, Steven Hefter, 
Brenda Holmes, Colleen Keating, Justin Keller, Karen King, Rachel Marks, 
Leanna Mellott, Kimberly Orozco, Jennifer Ortman, David Raglin, Nathan 
Ramsey, KaNin Reese, Jennifer Reichert, Lyndsey Richmond, Jonathan 
Rothbaum, Bina Kawe Saafi, Hyon Shin, Michael Starsinic, Janice Valdisera, 
Paula Vines, David Waddington, Tyson Weister, and Kai Wu. 

Faye E. Brock, Linda Chen, Christine E. Geter, and Stacey Barber provided 
publication management, graphic design and composition, editorial review, 
and 508 compliancy for the electronic media and print under the direction 
of Corey Beasley, Acting Chief of the Graphic and Editorial Services Branch, 
Public Information Office.

Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey Data
What Users of Data for American Indians and  
Alaska Natives Need to Know

Issued March 2021

U.S. Department of Commerce 
Gina M. Raimondo, 
Secretary

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Dr. Ron Jarmin, 
Acting Director

Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau,  
Understanding and Using  
American Community Survey  
Data: What Users of Data for 
American Indians and Alaska Natives 
Need to Know, U.S. Government 
Publishing Office, Washington, DC, 
2021.

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Dr. Ron Jarmin, 
Acting Director and  
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer

Albert E. Fontenot Jr., 
Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs

Deborah M. Stempowski, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office

Contents

1. Understanding the ACS: The Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

2. The Geography of American Indian and Alaska Native Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

3. Understanding and Using ACS Single-Year and Multiyear Estimates . . . . . . . 17

4. Making Comparisons With ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

5. Accessing ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

6. Case Studies Using ACS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

7. Understanding Error and Determining Statistical Significance . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

8. Calculating Measures of Error for Derived Estimates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52

9. Differences Between the ACS and the Decennial Census  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61

10. Using Dollar-Denominated Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

11. Measures of Nonsampling Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  68

12. Glossary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  iii 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    iii

U.S. Census Bureau 
This page is intentionally blank.

UNDERSTANDING AND USING AMERICAN  
COMMUNITY SURVEY DATA: 
WHAT DATA USERS FOR AMERICAN INDIANS 
AND ALASKA NATIVES NEED TO KNOW 

Suppose a tribal planner needs current information 
about the local population to plan for future economic 
development, a Commission on Indian Affairs in a 
southeastern state wants to improve access to health 
services for tribal members, or a policy analyst at a 
federal agency wants to measure the effectiveness 
of programs that fund critical health care services to 
American Indian and Alaska Native populations nation-
wide. Where could they turn for this information?

The U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey 
(ACS) provides a detailed portrait of the social, eco-
nomic, housing, and demographic characteristics of 
America’s communities, including information about 
the characteristics of American Indians and Alaska 
Natives and the areas where they live. ACS data 
are important to tribal government officials, federal 
funding agencies, state government agencies, and 

nongovernmental organizations that provide services 
to improve the well-being of tribal populations. When 
American Indian and Alaska Native respondents com-
plete the ACS, they are helping to ensure that the best 
statistics are available to their communities to inform 
future decisions. 

This handbook provides an overview of the ACS to 
help tribal data users and others understand the basics 
of the survey, how the data can be used, how to judge 
the accuracy of ACS estimates, and how to access ACS 
data on the Census Bureau’s Web site. It also includes 
some recent case studies that show how ACS data are 
being used to help address important policy and pro-
gram issues facing American Indian and Alaska Native 
populations. Links to additional ACS resources, includ-
ing technical documentation for more advanced users, 
are included throughout this handbook.

1. UNDERSTANDING THE ACS: THE BASICS

What Is the ACS?

The American Community Survey (ACS) is a nation-
wide survey designed to provide communities with 
reliable and timely social, economic, housing, and 
demographic data every year. A separate annual sur-
vey, called the Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS), 
collects similar data about the population and housing 
units in Puerto Rico. The Census Bureau uses data col-
lected in the ACS and the PRCS to provide estimates 
on a broad range of population, housing unit, and 
household characteristics for states, counties, cities, 
school districts, congressional districts, census tracts, 
block groups, and many other geographic areas. 

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 3.5 million 
addresses, with survey information collected nearly 
every day of the year. Data are pooled across a calen-
dar year to produce estimates for that year. As a result, 
ACS estimates reflect data that have been collected 
over a period of time rather than for a single point in 
time as in the decennial census, which is conducted 
every 10 years and provides population counts as of 
April 1 of the census year. 

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been col-
lected over a 12-month period and are available for 
geographic areas with at least 65,000 people. Starting 
with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is also produc-
ing “1-year supplemental estimates”—simplified ver-
sions of popular ACS tables—for geographic areas with 
at least 20,000 people. The Census Bureau combines 
5 consecutive years of ACS data to produce multiyear 
estimates for geographic areas with fewer than 65,000 
residents. These 5-year estimates represent data col-
lected over a period of 60 months.1 

Because the ACS is based on a sample, rather than all 
housing units and people, ACS estimates have a degree 
of uncertainty associated with them, called sampling 
error. In general, the larger the sample, the smaller the 
level of sampling error. To help users understand the 
impact of sampling error on data reliability, the Census 
Bureau provides a “margin of error” for each published 
ACS estimate. The margin of error, combined with the 
ACS estimate, gives users a range of values within 
which the actual “real-world” value is likely to fall.

1 The Census Bureau previously released 3-year estimates based on 
36 months of data collection. In 2015, the 3-year products were discon-
tinued. The 2011–2013 ACS 3-year estimates, released in 2014, are the 
last release of this product.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  1 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    1

U.S. Census Bureau  Table 1.1. Population and Housing Data Included in American Community Survey Data Products 

Social Characteristics
Ancestry
Citizenship Status
Citizen Voting-Age Population
Disability Status1
Educational Attainment
Fertility
Grandparents as Caregivers
Language Spoken at Home
Marital History2
Marital Status
Migration/Residence 1 Year Ago
Period of Military Service
Place of Birth
School Enrollment
Undergraduate Field of  

Degree3

Veteran Status2
Year of Entry

Economic Characteristics
Class of Worker
Commuting (Journey to Work)
Employment Status
Food Stamps/Supplemental 

Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP)4

Health Insurance Coverage2
Income and Earnings
Industry and Occupation
Place of Work
Poverty Status
Work Status Last Year

Housing Characteristics
Computer and Internet Use5
House Heating Fuel
Kitchen Facilities
Occupancy/Vacancy Status
Occupants Per Room

Plumbing Facilities6
Rent
Rooms/Bedrooms
Selected Monthly Owner Costs
Telephone Service Available
Tenure (Owner/Renter)
Units in Structure
Value of Home
Vehicles Available
Year Householder Moved Into 

Unit

Year Structure Built

Demographic Characteristics
Age and Sex
Group Quarters Population
Hispanic or Latino Origin
Race
Relationship to Householder
Total Population

1 Questions on Disability Status were significantly revised in the 2008 survey to cause a break in series. 
2 Marital History, Veterans’ Service-Connected Disability Status and Ratings, and Health Insurance Coverage were added in the 2008 survey. 
3 Undergraduate Field of Degree was added in the 2009 survey. 
4 Food Stamp Benefit amount was removed in 2008. 
5 Computer and Internet Use was added to the 2013 survey. 
6 One of the components of Plumbing Facilities, flush toilet, and Business or Medical Office on Property questions were removed in 2016.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 

TIP: In general, data users should be careful in draw-
ing conclusions about small differences between two 
ACS estimates because they may not be statistically 
different.

The ACS provides vital information on a yearly basis 
about our nation and its people, helping local officials, 
community leaders, businesses, and the public plan 
and make decisions based on the changes taking place 
in their communities. Through the ACS, we know more 
about demographic trends, jobs and occupations, 
educational attainment, veterans, homeownership, and 
many other topics. Because data collection is ongoing, 
the ACS also provides essential, up-to-date informa-
tion about population and housing characteristics both 
before and after natural disasters like Super Storm 
Sandy, economic crises like the Great Recession of 
2007 to 2009, and public health emergencies like the 
COVID-19 pandemic.

TIP:  The  ACS  was  designed  to  provide  estimates  of 
the characteristics of the population, not to provide 
counts of the population in different geographic areas 
or  population  subgroups.  For  basic  counts  of  the  
U.S. population by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin, 
visit  the  Census  Bureau’s  Population  and  Housing 
Unit Estimates Web page.2 The Population Estimates 
Program  does  not  produce  estimates  by  race  for 
American  Indian  and  Alaska  Native  areas.  However, 
this program serves as a critical source of information 
for producing such estimates.

The content collected through the ACS can be 
grouped into four main types of characteristics: social, 
economic, housing, and demographic, as shown in 
Table 1.1. Various tables in the ACS have different 
“universes,” or base reference totals against which all 
other characteristics are compared. Some tables cover 
population characteristics, while others cover housing 
characteristics. Among the population tables, some 
cover the entire population (such as tables of the 
population by age), while some cover only a subset of 
the population (such as tables of employment status, 
which include data only for the population aged 16 and 
older).  

2 U.S. Census Bureau, Population and Housing Unit Estimates, 

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest.html>.

2   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

2    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
ACS content is designed to meet the needs of federal 
government agencies, and every question in the ACS is 
asked for a reason. For example, questions about how 
people get to work, when they leave, and the length 
of their commutes are used for planning improve-
ments to roads, highways, rail lines, and bus routes, 
and for planning emergency response routes. Because 
participation in the ACS is mandatory, the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) will only approve nec-
essary questions for inclusion in the ACS. The OMB’s 
responsibility under the Paperwork Reduction Act 
requires that new questions demonstrate the practical 
utility of the data and minimize “respondent burden.” 

Respondent burden can be defined in different ways, 
but is often related to the length of the interview or 
questionnaire, or the extent to which questions are 
viewed as being intrusive or too personal.

Some people are reluctant to respond to the ACS 
because of concerns about the confidentiality of the 
data. However, strict confidentiality laws protect all 
ACS information that could be used to identify indi-
viduals or households under Title 13 of the U.S. Code.3 
This is true even for interagency communication: other 

3 U.S. Census Bureau, Title 13, U.S. Code, <www.census.gov/history 

/www/reference/privacy_confidentiality/title_13_us_code.html>.

Box 1.1. How Different Data User Communities Use ACS Data on American Indians and 
Alaska Natives

Federal agencies: ACS data help determine how 
more than $675 billion in federal funds are distrib-
uted to state and local areas each year. Federal 
agencies use ACS data to fund programs provid-
ing services such as education, health care, tribal 
courts, and housing to American Indians and Alaska 
Natives. For example, the Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD) uses ACS data in 
their report, Housing Needs of American Indians 
and Alaska Natives in Tribal Areas, which addresses 
issues of overcrowding and other housing prob-
lems among American Indians and Alaska Native 
populations.1 

Nongovernmental organizations: The National 
Congress of American Indians (NCAI) helps locate 
the best data for tribal planners, data users, 
researchers, NCAI staff, and other leaders. NCAI’s 
Census Information Center often fulfills requests for 
data and provides information on data accessibil-
ity and quality. Part of their goal is to explain the 
difference between reports based on the decennial 
census enumeration and data from the ACS and 
other federal surveys that are derived from sample 
data. Data users are often interested in basic popu-
lation counts at the tribal, congressional district, 
and state levels; as well as the voting-age popula-
tion; unemployment statistics; poverty and income 
statistics; housing conditions; and educational 
attainment in American Indian and Alaska Native 
areas.

Grant seekers: In 2015, the California Indian 
Manpower Consortium (CIMC) received a grant 
from the U.S. Department of Labor to support a 
“Career Pathways for Native Youth” Project. This 
project provides career training and resources for 
American Indian youth with limited or no work 
experience. In their grant proposal, CIMC cited 
unemployment data from the ACS to demonstrate 
the need for career services among American 
Indian youth.

Tribal Governments: The Navajo Nation’s Division 
of Economic Development uses ACS data to brief 
chapter leaders on geographic differences in 
poverty, unemployment, household income, and 
language spoken at home. Although they acknowl-
edge the limitations of ACS data—such as the large 
margins of error associated with some estimates 
for small geographic areas—they also value the 
ACS because it provides a “stable, consistently 
applied- and coded-” source of information for the 
Navajo Nation and other tribal leaders.2 

Researchers: Researchers use ACS data to delve 
deeper into social, economic, housing, and demo-
graphic issues facing American Indian and Alaska 
Native populations. For example, researchers have 
used ACS data, linked with local labor market 
information, to investigate contemporary Native 
poverty and its potential links to urbanization of 
the American Indian population and the growth of 
tribally owned casinos.3

1 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development,  
Housing Needs of American Indians and Alaska Natives in Tribal 
Areas, <www.huduser.gov/portal/publications 
/HousingNeedsAmerIndians-ExecSumm.html>. 

2 National Research Council, Benefits, Burdens, and Prospects 

of the American Community Survey: Summary of a Workshop, 
Daniel L. Cork, rapporteur, Committee on National Statistics,  
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education  
(Washington, DC: The National Academies Press: 2013).

3 James J. Davis, Vincent J. Roscigno, and George Wilson, 
“American Indian Poverty in the Contemporary United States,”  
Sociological Forum, Vol. 31, No. 1, March 2016.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  3 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    3

U.S. Census Bureaugovernment agencies do not have the legal right to 
access individuals’ confidential information. 

Who Uses ACS Data and Why?

The ACS puts up-to-date information about important 
social issues at the fingertips of people who need 
it, including tribal leaders, planners, and program 
directors/managers; businesses; federal policymakers; 
researchers; nongovernmental organizations; 
journalists; teachers and students; and the public (see 
Box 1.1). Tribal governments are using ACS information 
to keep track of year-to-year population changes in 
their jurisdictions so they can better address the needs 
of their constituents. Businesses use the data to better 
understand their current or potential customers. The 
federal government uses ACS information to evaluate 
the need for federal programs and to run those 
programs effectively. 

The topics included in the ACS were chosen because 
federal and state governments require the data 
to manage or evaluate programs. For example, 
information on income is used for grant allocation by 
the U.S. Social Security Administration, the National 
School Lunch Program, the Low Income Home Energy 
Assistance Program, and the U.S. Department of 
Education. For more information about how federal 
agencies and other data users use the ACS in their 
work, visit the Census Bureau’s Web page showing 
Questions on the Form and Why We Ask.4

History of the ACS 

Every 10 years since 1790, Congress has authorized 
funds to conduct a national census of the U.S. popula-
tion, as required by the U.S. Constitution. Censuses 
conducted between 1940 and 2000 consisted of a 
“short form,” which included basic questions about 
age, sex, race, Hispanic origin, household relationship, 
and owner/renter status, and a “long form” used for 
only a sample of households. The long form included 
not only the basic short-form questions but also 
detailed questions about social, economic, and hous-
ing characteristics.

Data from the census long form provided a detailed 
snapshot, every 10 years, of America’s population 
and households. However, in today’s world, our com-
munities can change very quickly. Between decen-
nial censuses, local governments, organizations, and 
businesses need timely data to assess and plan for 
local needs. Costly mistakes can result when planners 
and policymakers do not have current data on which 

to base their decisions. That is one of the key reasons 
the Census Bureau moved to a new way of gathering 
data. Rather than taking a snapshot of communities 
once every 10 years, the ACS was designed to provide 
a dynamic and timely picture of the nation every year. 

The ACS underwent years of extensive testing, includ-
ing demonstration surveys conducted in parallel with 
the 2000 Census to evaluate the reliability of survey 
results. The ACS achieved full, nationwide implemen-
tation in 2005 for the household population and was 
expanded to cover the full population (including group 
quarters—such as college dormitories) in 2006. In 
2010, the ACS replaced the census long form as the 
nation’s source of social and economic data for popu-
lation and housing characteristics.

Over time, questions have been added, revised, or 
removed from the survey, as shown in Table 1.1. For 
example, in 2008, three new questions on marital his-
tory, health insurance coverage, and veteran’s service-
connected disability were added, while the questions 
on disability were significantly revised to cause a break 
in series. The data from these new and revised ques-
tions collected in 2008 were first available in the ACS 
products released in 2009. A new question on bach-
elor’s field of degree was added in 2009—with data 
available in 2010—while in 2013, three new questions 
on computer ownership and Internet access were 
added, with data available in 2014. 

When a new question is added to the survey, 1-year 
estimates are available the following year, but it takes 
5 years to accumulate data for small geographic areas. 
While ACS 1-year estimates of health insurance cover-
age were first available in 2009, ACS 5-year estimates 
of coverage (for 2008–2012) were first available in 
2013. 

In 2014, the Census Bureau conducted a compre-
hensive assessment of the ACS program, including a 
review of each ACS question. This ACS Content Review 
sought to understand which federal programs use the 
information collected by each question and assess how 
the Census Bureau might reduce respondent burden.5 
Based on this assessment, the questions on the pres-
ence of a flush toilet and whether there is a business or 
medical office on the property were removed from the 
ACS, beginning with the 2016 survey.

The sample size of the ACS and the ways data are col-
lected have also changed over time, as described in 
more detail in the next section. 

4 U.S. Census Bureau, Questions on the Form and Why We Ask,  

<www.census.gov/acs/www/about/why-we-ask-each-question/>.

Review, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/operations-and 
-administration/2014-content-review.html>. 

5 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2014 Content 

4   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

4    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauHow Are ACS Data Collected?

From 2005 through 2012, the ACS collected data using 
three sequential methods or “modes:” paper question-
naires through the mail, phone interviews, and per-
sonal visits with a Census Bureau interviewer. Starting 
in 2013, the Census Bureau added a fourth mode—an 
Internet response option—that simplified data collec-
tion and reduced survey costs. Starting in late 2017, 
based on declining response rates and increasing 
costs, the Census Bureau discontinued using phone 
interviews to follow up with nonrespondents. The 
annual sample size of the ACS has also increased over 
time, from 2.9 million addresses in 2005 to more than 
3.5 million addresses in 2015. This increased sample 
size has improved the precision of the ACS estimates. 
Over a 5-year period, the Census Bureau samples 
approximately 1 in 9 households nationwide, but the 
sampling rate is higher in areas with small populations 
and low predicted response rates. 

Of the 3.5 million addresses selected for ACS inter-
views in 2018, about 2.1 million resulted in final inter-
views. The number of final interviews is smaller than 
the number of initial addresses selected because the 
Census Bureau conducts in-person interviews with 
only a subset of those who do not respond by Internet, 
mail, or phone. Addresses are also excluded if they are 
determined to be invalid or commercial. 

The Census Bureau calculates survey response rates to 
help determine the quality of the ACS data.6 An analy-
sis of survey response from the 2008–2012 ACS 5-year 
data showed that the response rate for American 
Indian and Alaska Native areas—at 97.9 percent—
was comparable to the national response rate (97.6 
percent).7 For more information about ACS sample 
size and response rates, visit the Census Bureau’s Web 
page on Sample Size and Data Quality.8

The annual ACS sample is smaller than that of the 
2000 Census long-form sample, which included about 
18 million housing units. As a result, the ACS needs 
to combine population or housing data from multiple 
years to produce reliable numbers for small counties, 
neighborhoods, and other local areas. To provide infor-
mation for communities each year—including American 

6 The survey response rate is the ratio of the estimate of housing 

units interviewed after data collection is complete to the estimate 
of all units that should have been interviewed. Interviews include 
complete and partial interviews with enough information to be pro-
cessed. 

7 Michael D. Starsinic, “American Community Survey Response and 
Nonresponse Rates for American Indian and Alaska Native Geographic 
Areas,” (November 2, 2016), accessed online at <www.census.gov 
/content/dam/Census/library/working-papers/2014/acs/2014 
_Starsinic_01.pdf>. 

8 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Sample Size 
and Data Quality, <www.census.gov/acs/www/methodology/sample 
-size-and-data-quality/>.

Indian areas, Alaska Native areas, and Hawaiian Home 
Lands—the ACS currently provides 1-year estimates 
for geographic areas with at least 65,000 people, and 
5-year estimates for smaller geographic areas down to 
the census tract and block group level. Starting with 
the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is also producing 
1-year supplemental estimates—simplified versions of 
popular ACS tables for geographic areas with popula-
tions of 20,000 or more.

One important fact to remember about the ACS is that 
the request to complete the survey is not mailed to 
specific people, but rather to specific addresses. The 
Census Bureau selects a random sample of addresses 
to be included in the ACS. Each address has about a  
1-in-40 chance of being selected in a given year, and 
no address should be selected more than once every 5 
years. Each month, the ACS sample includes approxi-
mately 295,000 addresses across the United States. 
This is a small number of housing units considering 
there are more than 140 million eligible addresses in 
the United States.

Until 2015, the Census Bureau sent all selected 
addresses an advance notification letter inform-
ing people living at that address that they had been 
selected to participate in the ACS. Shortly thereafter 
(for most U.S. addresses), instructions for complet-
ing the survey by Internet were mailed. Beginning 
in August 2015, the Census Bureau eliminated the 
advance notification letter and instead included 
instructions in the initial mail package for complet-
ing the survey by Internet or over the phone through 
a toll-free Telephone Questionnaire Assistance (TQA) 
line. If households do not respond by Internet or TQA, 
then a paper questionnaire is mailed to the address. 
In Puerto Rico and some hard-to-reach areas, only a 
paper questionnaire is mailed. 

Until 2017, if no response was received by Internet, 
TQA, or mail within a month following the initial mail-
ing, the Census Bureau followed up with a telephone 
interview when a telephone number was available. 
However, beginning in October 2017, the Census 
Bureau discontinued the telephone Nonresponse 
Followup operation because of declining response 
rates and increasing costs. Respondent data are still 
collected via telephone through the TQA operation.

If the Census Bureau is unable to get a response 
by Internet, mail, or TQA, then the address may be 
selected for an in-person interview. Because of the 
high cost per completed interview, the Census Bureau 
samples about one in three nonrespondent housing 
units for personal visit interviews. The proportion of 
nonresponding households selected for in-person 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  5 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    5

U.S. Census Bureauinterviews is higher in areas with lower predicted 
response rates. A sample of people living in group 
quarters facilities—such as college dorms, skilled nurs-
ing facilities, or correctional facilities—is also inter-
viewed in person to ensure coverage of people who 
are not living in housing units. 

While the basic method for selecting the ACS sample 
is the same across the country, the Census Bureau 
applies different sampling rates in some cases to 
improve the reliability of estimates. For example, the 
ACS samples up to 15 percent of housing units in less 
populated areas, while sampling rates in more popu-
lated areas are often much lower. For more information 
about ACS methods, visit the Census Bureau’s Design 
and Methodology Report Web page.9

Racial/Ethnic Classification in the ACS

Figure 1.1 shows the race question that appears on the 
2020 ACS questionnaire.10 Beginning in the 2020 ACS, 
six examples are provided for the "American Indian 
or Alaska Native" category. These examples represent 
some of the largest population groups within the geo-
graphically diverse population of the category. A com-
bined “American Indian or Alaska Native” category is 
designed to collect data on both American Indians and 
Alaska Natives. The responses to this question provide 
the information from which the estimates for American 
Indians and Alaska Natives are derived. The responses 
are based on self-identification. Respondents are 
asked to report one or more races for themselves and 
other members of their households. Respondents 
who identify themselves as American Indian or Alaska 
Native are asked to report their enrolled or principal 
tribe. People can report more than one tribe. The racial 
and ethnic classifications included on the ACS ques-
tionnaire follow OMB guidelines for the classification of 
federal data on race and ethnicity (see Box 1.2).

9 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Design and 
Methodology Report, (January 2014), <www.census.gov/programs 
-surveys/acs/methodology/design-and-methodology.html>.

10 U.S. Census Bureau, 2020 ACS Questionnaire, <www.census.gov 

/programs-surveys/acs/methodology/questionnaire-archive.2020 
.html>. 

  Figure 1.1. Race Question on 2020 American Community Survey Form

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey.

6   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

6    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauBox 1.2. Federal Guidelines for Reporting Data on the American Indian and Alaska 
Native Population

The racial and ethnic classifications used by the 
Census Bureau follow the latest standards issued 
by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 
in their Federal Register Notice, Revisions to the 
Standards for the Classification of Federal Data 
on Race and Ethnicity (October 30, 1997).1 These 
standards govern the categories federal agencies 
must use to collect and present federal data on 
race and ethnicity. The OMB standards require two 
minimum ethnicity categories (Hispanic and not 
Hispanic) and five minimum race categories (White, 
Black or African American, American Indian or 
Alaska Native, Asian, and Native Hawaiian or Other 
Pacific Islander). A sixth category, “Some Other 
Race,” was added to the ACS with OMB approval. In 

1 Office of Management and Budget, Revisions to the  
Standards for the Classification of Federal Data on Race and  
Ethnicity, <www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-1997-10-30/pdf 
/97-28653.pdf>. 

addition to the five race groups, the OMB standards 
also state that respondents should be offered the 
option of selecting one or more races.

The OMB standards define American Indian or 
Alaska Native as a person having origins in any of 
the original peoples of North and South America 
(including Central America) and who main-
tains tribal affiliation or community attachment. 
Tabulated data for this category include people 
who:

• 

Indicate their race as “American Indian” or 
“Alaska Native.” 

•  Report the name of an American Indian tribe 
(for example, Navajo or Blackfeet) or Alaska 
Native tribe (for example, Inupiat or Yup’ik). 

•  Report entries such as Canadian Indian, French 
American Indian, or Spanish American Indian.

People who answer the question on race by marking 
only the “American Indian or Alaska Native” response 
box, and/or writing in one or more tribes, are referred 
to as the “American Indian and Alaska Native alone” 
population. People who answer the race question 
by marking the “American Indian or Alaska Native” 
response box and one or more other races, for exam-
ple “American Indian and Alaska Native” and “White” 
or “American Indian and Alaska Native” and “Black 
or African American,” are included in the “American 
Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination” 
population. 

Based on responses to the race question, data on 
American Indians and Alaska Natives can be tabulated 
or shown in data tables in two broad minimum and 
maximum categories, namely, the American Indian 
and Alaska Native alone population and the American 
Indian and Alaska Native alone or in any combination 
population.

The Census Bureau also codes responses from the 
write-in box of the race question to provide statistics 
for specific:

• American Indian tribes.
• Alaska Native tribes, villages, associations, commu-

nities, and corporations.

• Tribal groupings.

When minimum population requirements are met, data 
are available for two minimum and maximum catego-
ries, for example the Hoopa Valley Tribe alone or the 
Hoopa Valley Tribe alone or in any combination. 

Tribal groupings are a Census Bureau convention, 
which consists of combinations of individual American 
Indian tribes and Alaska Native tribes, villages, asso-
ciations, communities, and corporations. For example, 
the Hoopa tribal grouping consists of three tribes: 
Trinity, Whilkut, and Hoopa Valley Tribe. To explore 
the complete list of detailed American Indian and 
Alaska Native categories and their relationship to tribal
groupings, see the ACS Code Lists.11

Some American Indians live in federally recognized 
American Indian and Alaska Native areas, such as the 
Navajo Nation Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust 
Land, but the majority of American Indians live outside
of these areas (off reservation). For more information 
about American Indian geographic areas, see the sec-
tion on the “Geography of American Indian and Alaska
Native Areas.”

When Are ACS Data Released?

ACS data are very timely because they are released 
in the year immediately following the year in which 
they are collected (see Table 1.2). Beginning with data 
collected in 2005, 1-year estimates have been pub-
lished for areas with populations of 65,000 or more, 
including all states, the District of Columbia, and 
many large counties and cities. In 2010, the Census 
Bureau released the first ACS 5-year estimates for 
the nation, states, cities, counties, American Indian 
and Alaska Native areas, and other geographic areas. 

11 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Code 
Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/technical-documentation/code-lists.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  7 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    7

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
 
 Table 1.2. Release Schedule for ACS Data

Year of data release

1-year estimates 
(65,000+)

1-year supplemental 
estimates (20,000+)

3-year estimates1 
(20,000+)

5-year estimates2  
(all areas)

Data product, population threshold, and year(s) of data collection

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

2014/2015

2016

2017

2018

NA

NA

2005–2007

2006–2008

2007–2009

2008–2010

2009–2011

2010–2012

2011–2013

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

2005–2009

2006–2010

2007–2011

2008–2012

2009–2013

2010–2014

2011–2015

2012–2016

2013–2017

2014–2018

NA Not available.
1 The Census Bureau produced ACS 3-year estimates starting in 2008, but that series was discontinued in 2015.  
2 Five-year estimates are available for areas as small as census tracts and block groups.  
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

These 5-year estimates have been updated annually 
by removing the earliest year and replacing it with the 
latest one, thus providing an unprecedented ability to 
annually monitor social and economic trends in local 
communities.

The Census Bureau also produced ACS 3-year esti-
mates, starting in 2008, but that series was discontin-
ued in 2015. However, every community in the nation 
will continue to receive a detailed statistical portrait 
of its social, economic, housing, and demographic 
characteristics through ACS 1-year and 5-year data 
products. 

In July 2016, the Census Bureau released a series 
of supplemental estimates, consisting of new 1-year 
estimates for geographic areas with populations of 
20,000 or more. These tables provide 1-year estimates 
for many geographic areas that were previously only 
available through the 3-year or 5-year data products.

While data for the total American Indian and Alaska 
Native population are available through each of the 
standard ACS releases, characteristics for detailed 
tribal population groups are primarily available every 
5 years through the release of a special set of tables. 
These tables, known as the Selected Population Tables 
and American Indian and Alaska Native Tables, are 

based on 5 years of ACS data collection. The tables 
are repeated for over 1,000 tribal groups to provide a 
detailed statistical portrait for each group.

Data from the ACS 5-year American Indian and Alaska 
Native Tables are available for tribal groups with 
populations of 100 or more at the national level. This 
is a much lower population requirement compared to 
the 65,000 national-level population minimum for the 
Selected Population Profiles in the standard ACS 1-year 
data release. 

ACS data collected for earlier years, from 2000 
through 2004, are also available for areas with 
250,000 people or more, including all states, the 
District of Columbia, and many large counties and 
cities. However, few federally recognized tribal govern-
ments meet this 250,000 population threshold.

ACS Data Collection for American Indian 
and Alaska Native Areas

Beginning with the 2011 ACS sample, the Census 
Bureau made several improvements to their sam-
pling procedures to increase the reliability of the 
ACS estimates for populations in certain well-defined 
geographic areas, including American Indian and 
Alaska Native areas. Since 2011, the Census Bureau has 

8   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

8    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
conducted in-person interviews for all housing units 
with unmailable addresses, as well as addresses that 
did not respond via Internet, mail, or phone in the fol-
lowing areas:12

•  Hawaiian Home Lands.

•  Alaska Native Village Statistical Areas.

•  All American Indian areas with at least 10 percent 
of the population responding to the 2010 Census 
as American Indian or Alaska Native (alone or in 
any combination).

From 2011–2020, unmailable addresses were excluded 
from mail, Internet, and phone interviews. Beginning in 
2021, the Census Bureau allows unmailable addresses 
the option to respond online.

The Census Bureau also conducts interviews in remote 
Alaska—a set of rural areas in Alaska that are difficult 
to access and for which all housing unit addresses are 
treated as unmailable.13 Interviews were only con-
ducted in-person until 2021 when Internet completion 
became an option for remote Alaska. Because of the 
difficulties in field operations during specific months 
of the year and the extremely seasonal population 
in these areas, data collection operations in remote 
Alaska differ from the rest of the country. Previously, 
all sample addresses were contacted by personal visit 
to attempt interviews in one of two interview peri-
ods of the year—January through April or September 
through December. Starting in 2021, the Census 
Bureau extends these two interview periods from 4 to 
6 months. By extending these interview periods from 
January through June and July through December, 
it allows field staff to travel to these remote loca-
tions during a window of time that is safer and less 

12 Examples of unmailable addresses include those with only physi-
cal descriptions of a housing unit and its location, or with post office 
(P.O.) box addresses, as well as addresses missing place names and zip 
codes. P.O. box addresses are considered unmailable because of the 
unknown location of the housing unit using the P.O. box. Addresses 
missing zip codes are considered unmailable when the place name is 
also missing. 

13 The county equivalents identified as totally or partially remote 
in Alaska include: Aleutians East, Aleutians West, Bristol Bay, Denali, 
Lake and Peninsula, Northwest Arctic, Southeast Fairbanks, Kusilvak, 
Yukon-Koyukuk, Bethel, Dillingham, Nome, North Slope, and Valdez-
Cordova. 

expensive, as well as a time when they know residents 
will be present.14 

Between 2010 and 2012, these new sampling proce-
dures—combined with the increase in the overall ACS 
sample size, starting in 2011—resulted in a 26 percent 
increase in the number of housing units in American 
Indian and Alaska Native areas initially selected for the 
ACS sample, and an 80 percent increase in the num-
ber of final housing unit interviews conducted in these 
areas (see Table 1.3).

More information about ACS methods, including 
a description of sampling procedures in remote 
Alaska, is available in the Census Bureau’s chapter on 
“Sample Design and Selection” in their Design and 
Methodology Report.15

Meeting the Needs of American Indian and 
Alaska Native Communities

The Census Bureau pledges to consult with tribal lead-
ers and cooperate with them on any activities regard-
ing the decennial census and ACS that might affect 
their tribes. This policy applies to all activities of the 
Census Bureau. Since each tribal nation forms its own 
government, the Census Bureau works with them one-
by-one to coordinate data collection. It is imperative 
that all Census Bureau operations, including the ACS, 
be conducted with the acknowledgment and coop-
eration of the tribal authority over those reservation 
areas. For more information, see the Census Bureau’s 
Handbook for Consultation With Federally-Recognized 
Indian Tribes.16

The Census Bureau trains field representatives to con-
duct interviews on American Indian and Alaska Native 
Reservations. The Census Bureau strives to respect 
each individual tribe’s own customs, beliefs, and 
cultural norms, and field interviewers are instructed 
to follow set procedures to ensure that interviews 

14 Prior to the 2011 sample year, all remote Alaska sample cases 

were subsampled for personal interviews at a rate of 2 in 3. 

15 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Design and 
Methodology Report, Chapter 4: Sample Design and Selection, (January 
2014), <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/design_and_methodology/acs_design_methodology_ch04_2014.pdf>.

16 U.S. Census Bureau, Handbook for Consultation With  

Federally-Recognized Indian Tribes, <www.census.gov/content/dam 
/Census/library/publications/2011/dec/2011-handbook-indian-tribes 
.pdf>. 

  Table 1.3 Effect of Sample Design Changes for American Indian and Alaska Native Areas

Housing unit

Initially Selected Housing Unit Addresses

Final Housing Unit Interviews

Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 

2010

80,000   

 47,000 

2012

Percent increase

101,000

84,000 

26%

80%

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  9 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    9

U.S. Census Bureauare conducted in a culturally sensitive manner. For 
their first visit to a reservation, the Census Bureau’s 
Regional Office staff contacts the tribal government 
leadership and establishes a contact person identified 
as the Tribal Government Liaison, for the initial visit 
and subsequent visits. The contact person is usually 
the Tribal Leader. 

Additional Background Information

What Is the ACS? 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/about.html>  
This Web page includes basic information about the 
ACS and provides links to additional background 
materials. 

The Census Bureau also works closely with Native 
Americans and Alaska Natives to ensure that survey 
results accurately reflect and meet the needs of these 
communities. A Native American Data Improvement 
Working Group was formed to identify and address 
the common data needs of tribes and federal agencies. 
The group includes representatives from the Census 
Bureau, Department of the Interior, and Bureau of 
Indian Affairs (BIA), and collaborates with tribes and 
other federal agencies. This working group includes 
three subgroups: 

•  A Geospatial Subgroup established to develop a 
process for integrating BIA’s authoritative Indian 
land boundary data into the Census Bureau’s geo-
graphic database and products.

•  A Federal Data sets and Products Subgroup estab-
lished to identify and address common data needs 
and gaps for tribes and federal agencies.

•  A Communications Subgroup established to 

develop an overall systematic communication plan 
for implementing this agreement through internal 
and external subgroups, agencies, tribes, and the 
Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC), and 
act as the point of contact for reporting between 
groups.

ACS Questionnaire Archive 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
/questionnaire-archive.html> 
Browse archived sample ACS questionnaires for the 
household and group quarters populations in English 
and Spanish with instruction guides from 1996 through 
the present.

Methodology 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/methodology 
.html>  
This Web page contains links to information on ACS 
data collection and processing, evaluation reports, and 
related topics.

Questions on the Form and Why We Ask 
<www.census.gov/acs/www/about/why-we-ask-each 
-question/> 
This Web page provides more information about how 
federal agencies and other data users use the ACS in 
their work.

ACS Data Releases 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/news/data 
-releases.html> 
This Web page includes information about the ACS 
data release schedule, guidance on using the latest 
ACS data, and technical information about geography 
and product changes. Users can also browse the notes 
from previous years.

Table and Geography Changes 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical 
-documentation/table-and-geography-changes.html>  
This Web page provides information about changes to 
tables and geography for each ACS data release.

10   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

10    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau2. THE GEOGRAPHY OF AMERICAN INDIAN AND 
ALASKA NATIVE AREAS

Data from the American Community Survey (ACS) 
are tabulated for a variety of different geographic 
areas, including states, counties, cities, towns, census 
tracts, and block groups, as well as American Indian 
and Alaska Native legal and statistical areas, such as 
American Indian Reservations, Alaska Native Village 
Statistical Areas, or Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Areas. 

The availability of data for a specific population group 
will depend on the size of that population group or the 
population size of the geographic area of interest. 

TIP:  Most  American  Indian  and  Alaska  Native  areas 
have  populations  of  less  than  20,000  and  therefore 
receive only 5-year data products. This means that for 
many topics, 1-year estimates of the American Indian 
and Alaska Native population are only available at the 
national- and state-level.

Table 2.1 lists the American Indian and Alaska Native 
areas for which 2018 ACS data are available as 1-year 
estimates (16 areas) or 1-year supplemental estimates 
(38 areas). Alaska Native Regional Corporations—
unique corporate entities established to conduct 
business with Alaska Natives—are included as separate 
geographic areas on this list. Note that the information 
in this table is based on current geographic bound-
aries and is expected to change over time. The ACS 
uses boundaries as of January 1 of the last year of the 
estimate period. For example, the 2018 ACS 1-year 
estimates use boundaries as of January 1, 2018, as 
reported to the U.S. Census Bureau. 

Figure 2.1 shows a map of the 38 American Indian 
and Alaska Native areas that met the 65,000 popula-
tion threshold for 2018 ACS 1-year estimates, or the 
20,000 population threshold for 1-year supplemental 
estimates. Of these areas, half were located in either 
Alaska or Oklahoma.

  Figure 2.1 American Indian and Alaska Native Areas for Which ACS 1-Year Estimates or ACS 1-Year    
                Supplemental Estimates Were Released: 2018

Note: One-year estimates are available for areas with at least 65,000 people, and 1-year supplemental estimates are available for areas 
with at least 20,000 people. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  11 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    11

U.S. Census Bureau Table 2.1. American Indian and Alaska Native Areas for Which ACS 1-Year Estimates and  
                1-Year Supplemental Estimates Were Released: 2018 

American Indian Area/Alaska Native Area

1-year  
estimates

1-year  
supplemental 
estimates

2018 ACS 
population

Calista Alaska Native Regional Corporation, AK
Cook Inlet Alaska Native Regional Corporation, AK
Doyon Alaska Native Regional Corporation, AK
Sealaska Alaska Native Regional Corporation, AK
Agua Caliente Indian Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land, CA
Cher-O-Creek State Designated Tribal Statistical Area, AL
Cherokee Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Cheyenne-Arapaho Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Chickaloon Alaska Native Village Statistical Area, AK
Chickasaw Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Choctaw Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Citizen Potawatomi Nation-Absentee Shawnee Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Coharie State Designated Tribal Statistical Area, NC
Creek Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Echota Cherokee State Designated Tribal Statistical Area, AL
Flathead Reservation, MT
Four Winds Cherokee State Designated Tribal Statistical Area, LA
Isabella Reservation, MI
Kaw/Ponca joint-use Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Kenaitze Alaska Native Village Statistical Area, AK
Kickapoo Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Kiowa-Comanche-Apache-Fort Sill Apache Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Knik Alaska Native Village Statistical Area, AK
Lumbee State Designated Tribal Statistical Area, NC
MaChis Lower Creek State Designated Tribal Statistical Area, AL
Navajo Nation Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land, AZ—NM—UT
Nez Perce Reservation, ID
Oneida (WI) Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land, WI
Osage Reservation, OK
Pine Ridge Reservation, SD—NE
Puyallup Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land, WA
Sac and Fox Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Samish Tribal Designated Statistical Area, WA
Seminole Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, OK
Uintah and Ouray Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land, UT
United Houma Nation State Designated Tribal Statistical Area, LA
Wind River Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land, WY
Yakama Nation Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land, WA

 X 
 X 
 X 

 X 
 X 
 X 

 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 

 X 
 X 
 X 

 X 

 X 

 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 

 26,343 
 453,587 
 112,280 
 73,058 
 27,489 
 85,832 
 513,452 
 184,524 
 29,000 
 312,820 
 231,617 
 129,548 
 64,285 
 803,574 
 55,921 
 31,617 
 33,856 
 28,442 
 27,772 
 36,078 
 20,203 
 190,678 
 78,521 
 501,406 
 23,393 
 175,151 
 21,286 
 22,439 
 47,014 
 19,422 
 53,110 
 59,355 
 39,553 
 22,467 
 24,335 
 201,630 
 25,353 
 32,879 

Note: One-year estimates are available for areas with at least 65,000 people, and 1-year supplemental estimates are available for areas with at least 
20,000 people.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 1-year estimates. 

12   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

12    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Some American Indian areas cross state lines, such as 
the Navajo Nation Reservation and Off-Reservation 
Trust Land. The Navajo Nation Reservation spans three 
states in the Mountain West: Arizona, New Mexico, and 
Utah (see Figure 2.2).

Socioeconomic or other characteristics for non- 
American Indian and non-Alaska Native populations 
may differ markedly from those for American Indian 
and Alaska Native populations. When ACS tables are 
disaggregated by race, differences can be easily noted 
for these two populations. 

TIP: ACS data users also need to understand that many 
American  Indian  and  Alaska  Native  areas  have  sub-
stantial populations that are neither American Indian 
nor Alaska Native.

  Figure 2.2. Map of the Navajo Nation Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  13 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    13

U.S. Census Bureau Table 2.2. Number and Percentage of People in the Cherokee Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area Living Below  
                 the Poverty Level by Race: 2014–2018 

Number below 
poverty level

Margin of  
error (±)

Percent  
below  
poverty level

Margin of  
error (±)

Total population for whom poverty is determined

White alone
Black or African American alone
American Indian and Alaska Native alone
Asian alone

Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone

Some other race alone
Two or more races

 94,020 

 47,837 
 9,923 
 19,349 
 777 

 193 

 4,555 
 11,386 

2,100

1,654
605
1,115
240

105

659
791

18.5

14.8
32.3
22.5
14.1

30.9

32.9
23.3

0.4

0.5
1.7
1.2
4.5

12.6

3.7
1.4

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table S1701: "Poverty Status in the Past 12 Months."

For example, the Cherokee Oklahoma Tribal Statistical 
Area (OTSA) has a racially diverse population with 
different economic characteristics (see Table 2.2).17 In 
2014–2018, the overall poverty rate for people living in 
the Cherokee OTSA was 18.5 percent, but the rate for 
whites (14.8 percent) was much lower than the rate for 
American Indians/Alaska Natives (22.5 percent). 

While some ACS tables in the Census Bureau’s  
data.census.gov provide data disaggregated by race/
ethnicity, most do not.

Boundaries for statistical areas, such as counties and 
census tracts, are updated by local participants prior to 
each decennial census as part of the Census Bureau’s 
Participant Statistical Areas Program.19 A comparable 
program for tribal governments, the Tribal Statistical 
Areas Program, has provided for the delineation of 
tribal statistical areas, such as tribal census tracts, by 
the Census Bureau in conjunction with tribes.20 

A description of the American Indian and Alaska Native 
areas included in ACS data products is provided below.

TIP:  It  would  be  incorrect  to  interpret  an  economic 
indicator  such  as  poverty  rate  or  a  social  indicator 
such as school enrollment rate for an American Indian 
or Alaska Native area as describing the characteristics 
of the American Indian or Alaska Native population.

ACS data products for legal entities, such as reser-
vations and incorporated places, reflect the Census 
Bureau’s information about the legal boundaries for 
those entities as of January 1 of the year of data collec-
tion (or, as of January 1 of the last year of data col-
lection for 5-year estimates). The Census Bureau uses 
the results from an annual Boundary and Annexation 
Survey to update information about the legal bound-
aries and names of all governments, including many 
American Indian and Alaska Native areas.18

Legal Entities

Alaska Native Regional Corporations (ANRCs) are 
corporate entities established to conduct both busi-
ness (for profit) and nonprofit affairs of Alaska Natives 
pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act 
of 1972 (Public Law 92-203). Twelve ANRCs cover 
the entire state of Alaska except for the area within 
the Annette Island Reserve—a federally recognized 
American Indian reservation under the governmen-
tal authority of the Metlakatla Indian Community. A 
13th ANRC represents Alaska Natives who do not 
live in Alaska and do not identify with any of the 12 
corporations.

17 OTSAs include federally recognized American Indian tribes that 

do not currently have a reservation, but once had a reservation in  
Oklahoma. 

18 U.S. Census Bureau, Boundary and Annexation Survey,  

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/bas.html>. 

19 U.S. Census Bureau, Overview of the 2010 Census Participant  

Statistical Areas Program (PSAP), <www.census.gov/programs 
-surveys/geography/about/partnerships/2010-census-partnerships 
/psap.html>. 

20 U.S. Census Bureau, Overview of the 2010 Census Tribal  
Statistical Areas Program (TSAP), <www.census.gov/programs 
-surveys/geography/about/partnerships/2010-census-partnerships 
/tsap.html>. 

14   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

14    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
American Indian Reservations (AIRs) are areas that 
have been set aside by the United States for the use 
of tribes, the exterior boundaries of which are more 
particularly defined in tribal treaties, agreements, 
executive orders, federal statutes, secretarial orders, 
or judicial determinations. The Bureau of Indian Affairs 
maintains a list of all federally recognized tribal gov-
ernments and makes final determination of the inven-
tory of federal AIRs.21 The Census Bureau recognizes 
federal reservations (and associated off-reservation 
trust lands) as territory over which American Indian 
tribes have primary governmental authority. American 
Indian reservations can be legally described as colo-
nies, communities, Indian colonies, Indian communities, 
Indian rancherias, Indian reservations, Indian villages, 
pueblos, rancherias, ranches, reservations, reserves, 
settlements, or villages. Federal reservations may cross 
state and all other area boundaries.

ACS data are also provided for State American Indian 
Reservations (SAIRs), which are established by some 
state governments for tribes recognized by the state. 
A governor-appointed state liaison provides the names 
and boundaries for state-recognized American Indian 
reservations to the Census Bureau. State reservations 
must be defined within a single state but may cross 
county and other types of boundaries. 

Lands that are administered jointly or claimed by two 
tribes, whether federally or state recognized, are called 
“joint-use areas” and are treated as if they were sepa-
rate American Indian reservations for data presenta-
tion purposes.

American Indian Off-Reservation Trust Lands (ORTLs) 
are areas for which the United States holds title in 
trust for the benefit of a tribe or individual Indian. 
Trust lands may be located on or off of a reservation. 
The Census Bureau recognizes and tabulates data for 
off-reservation trust lands, which are always associ-
ated with a specific federally recognized reservation 
and/or tribal government. Off-reservation trust lands 
associated with tribes that do not have a reservation 
appear in ACS data tabulations by tribal area name, 
interspersed alphabetically among reservation names.

21 U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs,  

<www.bia.gov/>. 

Statistical Entities

Alaska Native Village Statistical Areas (ANVSAs) 
represent the more densely settled portion of Alaska 
Native villages (ANVs). The ANVs constitute asso-
ciations, bands, clans, communities, groups, tribes, 
or villages recognized in the Alaska Native Claims 
Settlement Act of 1971 (Public Law 92-203). Because 
ANVs do not have boundaries that are easy to locate, 
the Census Bureau does not delimit ANVs. Instead, the 
Census Bureau presents statistical data for ANVSAs 
that represent the settled portion of ANVs. In addition, 
each ANVSA should include only an area where Alaska 
Natives, especially members of the defining ANV, 
represent a substantial proportion of the population 
during at least one season of the year. 

Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Areas (OTSAs) are statis-
tical entities identified and delineated by the Census 
Bureau in consultation with federally recognized 
American Indian tribes in Oklahoma that do not cur-
rently have a reservation, but once had a reservation in 
that state. OTSAs primarily represent the former res-
ervation boundaries and are not required to conform 
to any other geographic entity for which the Census 
Bureau tabulates data (although they must be located 
entirely within the state of Oklahoma). Lands that 
are administered jointly or claimed by two OTSAs are 
called “joint-use areas” and are treated as if they were 
separate OTSAs for data presentation purposes.

Tribal Designated Statistical Areas (TDSAs) are sta-
tistical entities identified and delineated by the Census 
Bureau in consultation with federally recognized 
American Indian tribes that do not currently have 
a federally recognized land base (that is, a reserva-
tion or off-reservation trust land). A TDSA generally 
encompasses a compact and contiguous area that 
contains a concentration of people who identify with 
a federally recognized American Indian tribe and in 
which there is structured or organized tribal activ-
ity. A TDSA may be located in more than one state, 
and it may not include area within an American Indian 
reservation, off-reservation trust land, Alaska Native 
Village Statistical Area, state designated American 
Indian statistical area, or OTSA. The intent of the TDSA 
program is to collect and tabulate data analogous to 
the data provided to tribes with a reservation and/or 
off-reservation trust land.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  15 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    15

U.S. Census BureauState Designated Tribal Statistical Areas (SDTSAs) 
are statistical entities for state-recognized American 
Indian tribes that do not have a state-recognized land 
base, or reservation. SDTSAs are identified and delin-
eated for the Census Bureau by a state liaison identi-
fied by the governor’s office in each state. SDTSAs 
generally encompass a compact and contiguous area 
that contains a concentration of people who identify 
with a state-recognized American Indian tribe and in 
which there is structured or organized tribal activity. 
An SDTSA may not be located in more than one state, 
and it may not include area within an American Indian 
reservation, off-reservation trust land, Alaska Native 
Village Statistical Area, tribal designated statistical 
area, or OTSA. The intent of the SDTSA program is to 
collect and tabulate data analogous to the data pro-
vided to tribes with a state reservation.

Tribal Tracts and Tribal Block Groups are defined by 
the Census Bureau in cooperation with tribal officials 
to provide meaningful and relevant data for small 
geographic areas within the boundaries of feder-
ally recognized reservations and off-reservation trust 
lands. In the past, census tracts and block groups 
defined by state and county officials have some-
times had the effect of separating American Indian 
populations located within a single reservation and/
or off-reservation trust land such that statistics for 
these populations were adversely affected. To address 
this situation, and create a more effective program to 
provide small-area data for reservations, the Census 
Bureau provides tribal officials for federal reserva-
tions and off-reservation trust lands the opportunity to 

define tribal tracts and block groups for federal reser-
vations and off-reservation trust lands. 

Tribal tracts and tribal block groups are conceptually 
identical to census tracts and block groups defined 
within the standard state-county-tract-block group 
geographic hierarchy used for tabulating and pub-
lishing statistical data. Also, just as is the case with 
standard census tracts, the Census Bureau emphasizes 
in its guidelines for defining tribal tracts the need for 
consistent boundaries to enhance the comparisons of 
ACS and other data across time.

Additional Background Information

Geography & ACS 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography 
-acs.html> 
This Web page includes information about changes in 
geographic boundaries in the ACS, key concepts and 
definitions, and reference maps.

Geographic Terms and Concepts  
<https://www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/reference 
/GTC_10.pdf> 
This Web page summarizes the legal and statistical 
American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian 
areas for which the Census Bureau provides data.

16   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

16    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau3. UNDERSTANDING AND USING ACS SINGLE-
YEAR AND MULTIYEAR ESTIMATES

Each year, the U.S. Census Bureau publishes American 
Community Survey (ACS) 1-year estimates for geo-
graphic areas with populations of 65,000 or more. 
The 65,000-population threshold ensures that 1-year 
data are available for all regions, divisions, states, 
the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, congressio-
nal districts, Public Use Microdata Areas, and many 
large counties and county equivalents, metropoli-
tan and micropolitan areas, cities, school districts, 
and American Indian areas.22 The 1-year supplemen-
tal estimates, simplified versions of popular ACS 
tables, are also available for geographic areas with 
at least 20,000 people. These annual data provide 
policymakers, planners, business leaders, and others 
with a critical source of up-to-date information to plan 
for services such as transportation, medical care, hous-
ing, and schools.

For geographic areas with smaller populations, the 
ACS samples too few housing units to provide reliable 
single-year estimates. For these areas, several years 
of data are pooled together to create more precise 
multiyear estimates. Since 2010, the ACS has published 
5-year data (beginning with 2005–2009 estimates) 
for all geographic areas down to the census tract and 
block group levels.23 

This means that there are two sets of numbers—both 
1-year estimates and 5-year estimates—available for 
geographic areas with at least 65,000 people, such 
as the state of Virginia. Less populous areas, such as 
Bath County in Virginia’s Shenandoah Valley, receive 
only 5-year estimates. As shown in Table 2.1 in the sec-
tion on “Geographic Areas Covered in the ACS,” the 
vast majority of geographic areas receive only 5-year 
estimates. 

Understanding Period Estimates

Single-year and multiyear estimates from the ACS are 
all “period” estimates derived from a sample collected 
over a period of time, as opposed to “point-in-time” 
estimates such as those from past decennial censuses. 
For example, the 2000 Census “long form” sampled 
the resident U.S. population as of April 1, 2000. 

22 Public Use Microdata Areas, or PUMAs, are collections of coun-
ties—or tracts within counties—with approximately 100,000 people 
each. PUMAs do not cross state lines.

23 For several years, the Census Bureau produced both ACS 3-year 

estimates (for areas with populations of 20,000 or more) and ACS 
5-year estimates (for all geographic areas). Starting with the 2014 data 
release, the 3-year products were discontinued, but 5-year estimates 
are still published each year.

While an ACS 1-year estimate includes information col-
lected over a 12-month period, an ACS 5-year estimate 
includes data collected over a 60-month period. 

In the case of ACS 1-year estimates, the period is the 
calendar year (e.g., the 2018 ACS covers the period 
from January 2018 through December 2018). In the 
case of ACS multiyear estimates, the period is 5 calen-
dar years (e.g., the 2014–2018 ACS estimates cover the 
period from January 2014 through December 2018). 
Therefore, ACS estimates based on data collected from 
2014–2018 should not be labeled “2016,” even though 
that is the midpoint of the 5-year period.

Multiyear estimates should be labeled to indicate 
clearly the full period of time (e.g., “The child pov-
erty rate in 2014–2018 was X percent.”). They do not 
describe any specific day, month, or year within that 
time period.

Multiyear estimates require some considerations that 
single-year estimates do not. For example, multiyear 
estimates released in consecutive years consist mostly 
of overlapping years and shared data. 

TIP: As shown in Figure 3.1, consecutive 5-year esti-
mates contain 4 years of overlapping coverage (for 
example, the 2013–2017 ACS 5-year estimates share 
sample data from 2014 through 2017 with the 2014–
2018 ACS 5-year estimates). Because of this overlap, 
users should use extreme caution in making compari-
sons with consecutive years of multiyear estimates.

The primary advantage of using multiyear estimates 
is the increased statistical reliability of the data com-
pared with that of single-year estimates, particularly 
for small geographic areas and small population 
subgroups. Figure 3.2 shows the improved precision 
of an ACS 5-year estimate, compared with a 1-year 
estimate, for child poverty statistics in Bay County, 
Michigan—a county with about 100,000 residents in 
2018. The lines above and below the point estimates 
represent the confidence intervals, or ranges of uncer-
tainty, around each estimate. The confidence interval 
for the 1-year child poverty estimate ranges from 23.5 
percent to 36.9 percent (13 percentage points) while 
the interval for the 5-year estimate is narrower, rang-
ing from 22.7 percent to 27.7 percent (5 percentage 
points). (Refer to the section on “Understanding Error 
and Determining Statistical Significance” for a detailed 
explanation of uncertainty in ACS data.)

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  17 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    17

U.S. Census Bureau  Figure 3.1. Sample Cases Used in Producing ACS 5-Year Estimates

Year of data release

2019

2018

2017

2016

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, “When to Use 1-year, 3-year, or 5-year Estimates,” <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/guidance/estimates.html>.

Data collection period

  Figure 3.2. Child Poverty Rate in Bay County, Michigan: 2018 and    
                   2014–2018

Percentage of children in poverty

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

1-year estimate
(2018)

5-year estimate
(2014–2018)

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table DP03: Selected Economic Characteristics  
in the United States.

18   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

18    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauDeciding Which ACS Estimate to Use

For data users interested in obtaining detailed ACS 
data for small geographic areas (areas with fewer than 
65,000 residents), ACS 5-year estimates are the only 
option.24 However, data users interested in estimates 
for areas with populations of 65,000 or more have 
a choice between the 1-year and 5-year data series. 
Which data should be used?

The 1-year estimates for an area reflect the most cur-
rent data but they have larger margins of error than 
the 5-year estimates because they are based on a 
smaller sample. The 5-year estimates for an area have 
larger samples and smaller margins of error than 
the 1-year estimates. However, they are less current 
because the larger samples include data that were 
collected in earlier years. The main advantage of using 
multiyear estimates is the increased statistical reliabil-
ity for smaller geographic areas and small population 
groups.

One-year estimates are particularly useful for geo-
graphic areas with rapidly changing characteristics 
because they are based on the most current data—
data from the past year. For example, ACS 1-year data 
were used to compare poverty rates before, during, 

24 In July 2016, the Census Bureau released a series of supplemen-
tal estimates, consisting of new 1-year estimates for geographic areas 
with populations of 20,000 or more. These tables provide 1-year esti-
mates for many geographic areas that were previously only available 
through the 3-year or 5-year data products.

and after the 2007–2009 recession. In contrast, 5-year 
estimates provide less current information because 
they are based on both data from the previous year 
and data that are 2 to 5 years old. For many areas 
undergoing minimal change, using the “less current” 
multiyear estimates may not have a substantial influ-
ence on the estimates. However, in areas experiencing 
major changes over a given time period, the multiyear 
estimates may be quite different from the single-year 
estimates for any of the individual years. The single-
year and multiyear estimates will not be the same 
because they are based on data from two different 
time periods. This will be true even if the ACS single 
year is the midyear of the ACS multiyear period (e.g., 
2016 single year, 2014–2018 multiyear). 

For example, suppose a transportation planner in 
Austin, Texas, is interested in measuring recent trends 
in tele commuting. Comparing data by release year 
shows that the 5-year estimates are lagging behind the 
1-year estimates (see Figure 3.3). For example, while 
the 1-year estimates show a recent decline in the share 
of people working from home, the 5-year estimates 
show a fairly steady increase over time. 

TIP: In general, ACS 1-year data are more likely to 
show year-to-year fluctuations, while consecutive 
5-year estimates are more likely to show a smooth 
trend, because 4 of the 5 years in the series overlap 
from one year to the next.

  Figure 3.3. Percentage of Workers Aged 16 and Over Who Worked From Home in Austin, Texas:  
      2010–2018

1-year estimates

5-year estimates

9%

8%

7%

6%

5%

4%

3%

2%

1%

0

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Data release year

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, DP02: Selected Social Characteristics in the United States. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  19 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    19

U.S. Census Bureau  Table 3.1.  Distinguishing Features of ACS 1-Year, 1-Year Supplemental, and 5-Year Estimates¹

1-year estimates

1-year supplemental  
estimates

5-year estimates

12 months of collected data

12 months of collected data

60 months of collected data

Example: 
2018 ACS 1-year estimates

Dates collected:
January 1, 2018, to
December 31, 2018

Example:
2018 ACS 1-year supplemental 
estimates

Dates collected:
January 1, 2018, to
December 31, 2018

Example:
2014–2018 ACS 5-year estimates

Dates collected:
January 1, 2014, to
December 31, 2018

Data for areas with populations of 
65,000 and more

Data for areas with populations of 
20,000 and more

Data for all areas

Smallest sample size

Smallest sample size

Largest sample size

Less reliable than 3-year or 5-year

Less reliable than 5-year

Most current

Most current

Most reliable

Least current

Annually released:
2005 ACS 1-year data to present

Annually released:
2014 ACS 1-year data to present

Annually released:
2005–2009 ACS 5-year data to 
present

Best used when

Best used when

Best used when

Currency is more important than 
precision

Currency is more important than 
precision

Analyzing large populations

Analyzing smaller populations

Precision is more important than 
currency

Analyzing very small populations

Examining smaller geographic areas 
because the standard 1-year estimates 
are not available

Examining tracts and other small geo-
graphic areas because 1-year estimates 
are not available

1 ACS 3-year estimates have been discontinued. The 2005–2007, 2006–2008, 2007–2009, 2008–2010, 2009–2011, 2010–2012, and 2011–2013 
ACS 3-year estimates will remain available to data users, but no new 3-year estimates will be produced. Every community in the nation will 
continue to receive a detailed statistical portrait of its social, economic, housing, and demographic characteristics through 1-year and 5-year  
ACS products.

TIP: Data users may think that multiyear estimates 
are only appropriate when working with data for 
small areas, but this is not the case. Large geographic 
areas also benefit from the larger sample used for 
5-year estimates, resulting in more precise estimates 
of population and housing characteristics, especially 
for subpopulations within those areas. 

In addition, ACS 5-year estimates are not subject to the 
same data suppression rules that the Census Bureau 
applies to 1-year estimates. The Census Bureau restricts 
some 1-year data tables from publication because the 
estimates are not reliable. For more information, visit 
the Census Bureau’s Web page on Data Suppression.25

Some users may prefer to use 1-year estimates, despite 
their reduced reliability, as building blocks to produce 
estimates for meaningful higher levels of geography. 

25 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Data  
Suppression, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical 
-documentation/data-suppression.html>.

For example, data for neighboring counties could be 
combined to produce estimates for a metropolitan or 
regional planning area. These aggregations will simi-
larly benefit from the increased sample sizes, through 
improved precision. 

There are no hard-and-fast rules for choosing between 
1-year and 5-year data, but the margins of error pro-
vided with ACS data can help data users decide on 
the tradeoff between currency and reliability. Table 
3.1 shows the different features of ACS 1-year, 1-year 
Supplemental, 3-year, and 5-year estimates that 
data users can consider in choosing which estimates 
to use. Data users can also refer to the section on 
“Understanding Error and Determining Statistical 
Significance” for guidance on assessing the reliability 
of ACS estimates.

20   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

20    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau4. MAKING COMPARISONS WITH ACS DATA

One of the main benefits of the American Community 
Survey (ACS) is the ability to make comparisons—over 
time, across different geographic areas, and across dif-
ferent population subgroups. For example, data users 
may be interested in:

•  Comparing the proportion of people without 

health insurance in two counties.

•  Comparing the child poverty rate with the poverty 

rate for the working-age population.

•  Comparing the proportion of people who are 

foreign-born in a city in 2018 with the correspond-
ing share in 2017.

•  Comparing the proportion of people with college 

degrees from 2000 to 2018 in a state, based on 
data from the ACS and the 2000 Census.

When making comparisons with ACS data, note that 
differences in survey design, questionnaire content and 
design, sample size, or geography may affect compa-
rability of estimates. 

TIP: ACS data users interested in making compari-
sons also need to pay attention to sampling error 
because differences between estimates may, or may 
not, be statistically significant. 

This section describes some of the key considerations 
for data users making comparisons with ACS data. 
The U.S. Census Bureau also provides extensive guid-
ance on comparing ACS data on their Web site.26 The 
section on “Understanding Error and Determining 
Statistical Significance” includes guidance on how to 
calculate and interpret the statistical significance of 
differences between estimates.

The Census Bureau created a statistical testing tool to 
help data users test whether ACS estimates are statisti-
cally different from one another.27 

Comparing ACS Data Across 
Geographic Areas

One of the challenges for data users is deciding how 
to compare geographic areas with different popula-
tion sizes. Estimates for areas with fewer than 20,000 
people are produced only in the form of 5-year esti-
mates. However, for larger areas with at least 65,000 
people (or 20,000 people in the case of the 1-year 
supplemental estimates) both 1-year and 5-year data 

26 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  
Comparing ACS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/comparing-acs-data.html>.

27 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  

Statistical Testing Tool, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/statistical-testing-tool.html>.

are available, so data users need to choose which esti-
mates to use.28

TIP: When comparing ACS estimates across differ-
ent geographic areas or population subgroups, data 
users should avoid comparing ACS single-year esti-
mates with ACS multiyear estimates. That is, 1-year 
estimates should only be compared with other 1-year 
estimates, and 5-year estimates should only be com-
pared with other 5-year estimates. 

For example, suppose a policymaker wanted to com-
pare veterans’ characteristics in Athens, Texas—a small 
city southeast of Dallas—with veterans in Houston. 
Although the ACS publishes annual estimates on vet-
erans for Houston, only 5-year estimates are available 
for Athens. Thus, the policymaker should compare ACS 
5-year estimates for Athens with ACS 5-year estimates 
for Houston, even though more recent, single-year esti-
mates are available for Houston. 

TIP: Another option for presenting ACS data for less 
populated areas is to show single-year estimates for 
large counties in Texas and then combine the remain-
ing counties into a state “residual” by subtracting 
the available single-year data from the state total. 
Alternatively, data users could present ACS estimates 
for Public Use Microdata Areas, since they meet the 
65,000-population threshold required for single-
year estimates and are often used as a substitute for 
county-level data.29

Comparing ACS Data Over Time

TIP: Data users are encouraged to compare ACS data 
over time based on nonoverlapping estimates. 

When using ACS 1-year data, these comparisons are 
generally straightforward. Using multiyear estimates 
to look at trends for small populations can be chal-
lenging because they rely on pooled data for 5 years. 
For example, comparisons of 5-year estimates from 
2013 to 2017 and 2014 to 2018 are unlikely to show 
much difference because four of the years overlap; 
both sets of estimates include the same data collected 
from 2014 through 2017.30 The Census Bureau suggests 

28 In July 2016, the Census Bureau also released a series of 1-year 

supplemental estimates—simplified versions of popular ACS tables 
available for geographic areas with at least 20,000 people. 

29 Although Public Use Microdata Areas typically follow county 

boundaries, this is not always the case, particularly in some New 
England states. 

30 While the interpretation of this difference is difficult, these com-
parisons can be made with caution. Users who are interested in com-
paring overlapping multiyear period estimates should refer to the sec-
tion on “Understanding Error and Determining Statistical Significance” 
for more information.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  21 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    21

U.S. Census Bureau 
comparing 5-year estimates that do not overlap—for 
example, comparing 2009–2013 ACS 5-year estimates 
with 2014–2018 ACS 5-year estimates.  

TIP: Changes to ACS questions over time may make it 
difficult to measure trends. For example, the Census 
Bureau made substantial changes to the 2008 ACS 
questions on labor force participation and number of 
weeks worked. As a result, the Census Bureau recom-
mends using caution when comparing 2008 and later 
labor force data with 2007 and earlier estimates.

TIP: Data users are also encouraged to pay attention 
to sampling error associated with ACS data when 
looking at trends over time. For example, 1-year esti-
mates for a relatively small population subgroup may 
vary widely from year to year because of sampling 
variation, obscuring an underlying trend. In this case, 
multiyear estimates may be useful for assessing an 
underlying, long-term trend.

However, because multiyear estimates have an inherent 
smoothing effect on trends—because of overlapping 
estimates from year to year—they will tend to mask 
rapidly developing changes. 

Changes in Geography

ACS data generally reflect the geographic boundaries 
as of the year the data are collected. While geographic 
boundary changes are somewhat infrequent, they do 
occur, and those changes can affect a data user’s abil-
ity to make comparisons over time. For example, con-
gressional districts are redrawn every 10 years imme-
diately following the decennial census. Congressional 
district data from the 2012 ACS and later years reflect 
the new boundaries that were drawn after the 2010 
Census, while ACS data for earlier years reflect the 
2000 Census boundaries. Given the major changes to 
district boundaries after each census, a comparison of 
congressional district data between 2011 and 2012 is 
not feasible.

ACS data are also regularly updated to reflect local 
changes in geographic boundaries. For example, the 
city of Jurupa Valley, California, incorporated in July 
2011. Data for this city was first published in 2012, and 
has been updated each subsequent year, but data 
are not available for Jurupa Valley for 2011 and earlier 
years. The Census Bureau does not revise ACS data 
for previous years to reflect changes in geographic 
boundaries. For more information, visit the Census 
Bureau’s Web page on Geography & ACS.31

31 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  

Geography & ACS, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/geography-acs.html>.

Changes in Population Controls

The ACS uses a weighting methodology to ensure 
that ACS estimates are consistent with official Census 
Bureau population estimates by age, sex, race, and 
Hispanic origin. With each annual release of population 
estimates, the Population Estimates Program revises 
and updates the entire time series of estimates from 
the previous decennial census to the current year. 
However, ACS estimates for prior years are not revised 
or reweighted based on updated population estimates. 

The change in the population estimates from 2009 to 
2010 was particularly significant. The 2010 ACS 1-year 
data and 2006–2010 ACS 5-year data were controlled 
to population estimates that reflected the results of 
the 2010 Census. However, the 1-year and 5-year data 
for 2009 and earlier years used population estimates 
that were based on the 2000 Census. 

TIP: Because the 2009 ACS and 2010 ACS 1-year 
estimates use controls that are based on different 
decennial census base years, data users need to 
use caution when making comparisons across these 
years. Specifically, estimates of the number of people 
in a given geographic area or population subgroup 
are not strictly comparable between these 2 years. 
However, rates and percentages—as well as monetary 
data, such as median income values—are generally 
comparable between the two periods.

Comparisons With Data From the  
2000 Census, the 2010 Census, and  
the 2020 Census

The ACS was modeled after the long form of the 
decennial census, and data users interested in 
long-term trends can, in many cases, make valid 
comparisons between ACS and the 2000 Census (and 
earlier decennial census) estimates. Census Bureau 
subject matter specialists have reviewed the factors 
that could affect differences between ACS and the 
2000 Census estimates and they have determined 
that ACS estimates are similar to those obtained from 
past decennial census sample data for most areas and 
characteristics. 

However, differences in residence rules, universes (base 
reference totals against which all other characteris-
tics are compared), and reference periods between 
the two surveys should be considered when making 
these comparisons. For example, the ACS data are 
collected throughout the calendar year while the 2000 
Census long form sampled the population as of April 
1, 2000. Given the differences in the reference period, 
the two surveys may yield very different estimates for 

22   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

22    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
communities with large seasonal populations or those 
undergoing rapid change. The section on “Differences 
Between the ACS and the Decennial Census” provides 
more information about these differences.

The 2010 Census and 2020 Census were short-form 
only censuses so they do not include all of the detailed 
social, economic, and housing data available from 
previous censuses. However, data users can make 
valid comparisons between ACS estimates and basic 
characteristics from these censuses, including age, 
sex, race, Hispanic origin, household relationship, and 
homeowner status. For basic counts of the U.S. popu-
lation by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin between 
censuses, data users are encouraged to use the Census 
Bureau’s official population estimates, available on 
the Census Bureau’s Population and Housing Unit 
Estimates Web site.32 

Using Monetary Data

TIP: Data users also need to use caution in looking 
at trends involving income or other measures that 
are adjusted for inflation, such as rental costs, home 
values, and utility costs. 

For example, to compare published monetary data for 
the most recent year with data from the 2010 ACS, 
data users need to adjust the 2010 data for inflation, 
based on a national-level consumer price index. 

ACS multiyear estimates with dollar values are adjusted 
for inflation to the final year of the period. For example, 
the 2014–2018 ACS 5-year estimates are tabulated 
using dollars adjusted to 2018. 

32 U.S. Census Bureau, Population and Housing Unit Estimates, 

<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest.html>.

Note that inflation adjustment does not adjust for dif-
ferences in costs of living across different geographic 
areas. The section on “Using Dollar-Denominated Data” 
provides more information on the adjustment of ACS 
single-year and multiyear estimates for inflation. 

Additional Background Information

Geography & ACS  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography 
-acs.html> 
This Web page describes changes to local geographic 
area boundaries, which may affect comparisons of ACS 
data over time.

Comparing ACS Data  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/comparing-acs-data.html> 
This Web page provides guidance on making valid 
comparisons between the latest ACS data and ACS 
data from the previous year, the 2000 Census, and the 
2010 Census.

Statistical Testing Tool 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/statistical-testing-tool.html> 
The Statistical Testing Tool is a spreadsheet that tests 
whether ACS estimates are statistically different from 
one another. Simply copy or download ACS estimates 
and their margins of error into the tool to get instant 
results of statistical tests.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  23 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    23

U.S. Census Bureau5. ACCESSING ACS DATA

Data.census.gov is the U.S. Census Bureau’s primary 
tool for accessing population, housing, and economic 
data from the American Community Survey (ACS), the 
Puerto Rico Community Survey, the decennial census, 
and many other Census Bureau data sets.33 Data.census.
gov provides access to ACS data for a wide range of 
geographic areas, including states, cities, counties, cen-
sus tracts, and block groups.

The Census Bureau has produced a specialized tool, 
My Tribal Area, for data users who want to quickly 
access selected social, economic, housing, and demo-
graphic data for American Indian and Alaska Native 
areas.34 

For those interested in more detailed tables for tribes 
and tribal groups, the Census Bureau provides a series 
of Selected Population Tables and American Indian 
and Alaska Native Tables.35 These tables, based on 
ACS 5-year estimates, provide detailed estimates 
of characteristics for selected race, Hispanic origin, 
tribal, and ancestry populations.

Other specialized tools, such as My Congressional 
District and Census Business Builder, provide users 
with quick and easy access to statistics for particular 
geographic areas and topics.36 More advanced users 
also have several options to access more detailed ACS 
data through downloadable Summary Files, the Public 
Use Microdata Sample Files, or the Census Bureau’s 
Application Programming Interface (API).37

With all of these tools, disclosure rules and 
confidentiality thresholds can sometimes limit the 
availability of data for small groups and for areas 
with small populations. For example, for a Selected 
Population Profile, if fewer than 50 unweighted 

33U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov/>.
34 U.S. Census Bureau, My Tribal Area, <www.census.gov/tribal 

/index.html>. 

35 U.S. Census Bureau, Race/Ethnicity and AIAN Release  

Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical 
-documentation/race-ethnicity-aian.html>. 

36 U.S. Census Bureau, My Congressional District, <www.census 
.gov/mycd/>; and Census Business Builder (CBB), <www.census.gov 
/data/data-tools/cbb.html>. 

37 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  
Summary File Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data 
/summary-file.html>; American Community Survey (ACS), Accessing 
PUMS Data <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata.html>; 
and Developers, <www.census.gov/developers/>.

sample cases are available for an American Indian or 
Alaska Native tribe in a given geographic area, then 
data are not presented for that tribe. 

People who need help in accessing ACS data can visit 
Census Academy to learn about workshops, Webinars, 
and other no-cost training opportunities that may 
be available.38 Training may be general or tailored to 
meet your specific data needs.

Accessing ACS Data Through the My 
Tribal Area Tool

My Tribal Area is a specialized tool that allows data 
users to easily access and view population and hous-
ing estimates on American Indian and Alaska Native 
areas from the ACS.39 The tool displays tables of the 
latest ACS 5-year estimates for selected characteris-
tics, including: 

•  People: Demographic measures including sex and 
age, race, Hispanic or Latino origin, place of birth, 
ancestry, veteran status, disability status, resi-
dence 1 year ago.

• 

Jobs: Employment status, commuting to work, 
occupation, industry, class of worker.

•  Housing: Housing occupancy, homeownership, 

year householder moved into unit, value of home, 
mortgage status, selected monthly owner costs, 
gross rent.

•  Economy: Income and benefits, health insurance, 

poverty status.

•  Education: School enrollment, educational 

attainment.

To access estimates from My Tribal Area, select a 
tribal area, or browse tribal areas by state, using the 
dropdown menus (see Figure 5.1).

38 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Academy, <www.census.gov/data 

/academy.html>.

39 U.S. Census Bureau, My Tribal Area, <www.census.gov/tribal 

/index.html>. 

24   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

24    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau  Figure 5.1. My Tribal Area Home Page

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Tribal Area, <www.census.gov/tribal/>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  25 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    25

U.S. Census BureauAfter selecting a tribal area of interest, select one of 
the five topical areas to browse the data on that topic 
(see Figure 5.2). A box at the bottom of the table gives 

you the option of displaying the data with or without 
accompanying margins of error.

  Figure 5.2. Select a Topical Area

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, My Tribal Area, <www.census.gov/tribal/>.

Why this tool may be right for you

Why you may want to consider another tool

Data are displayed for a large number of American Indian 
and Alaska Native areas.

Data provide characteristics for the entire population liv-
ing in the AIAN area (regardless of their race or whether 
people identify as American Indian or Alaska Native).

The tables contain data on popular social, economic, hous-
ing, and demographic topics.

It contains only a subset of all ACS topics.

The data are timely and easy to access.

Data are only displayed for the most recent 5-year period.

26   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

26    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau6. CASE STUDIES USING ACS DATA

Case Study #1: Employment Data for the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe

Skill Level: Introductory 
Subject: Unemployment 
Type of Analysis: Understanding employment data for American Indians on reservations 
Tools Used: Data.census.gov, spreadsheet 
Authors: Cheryl Penny, Employment and Training Director, Standing Rock Sioux

The Employment and Training Director for the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe received two related questions that 
needed answers. How many American Indian people on the reservation are unemployed? And how many are out 
of a job but not even counted as unemployed because they have barriers to employment that prevent them from 
actively looking for work?

The question about the number of unemployed and not working American Indians on the reservation is impor-
tant because it indicates the need for services provided by the tribal employment and training program. In addi-
tion, the count of the American Indian unemployed on the reservation—the service area for the tribe’s program—
is a key factor determining the amount of funding the tribe receives under the special Native American workforce 
program administered by the U.S. Department of Labor.

Where can the director look for answers? Who counts unemployed American Indian people in reservation areas? 
The planner for the reservation has an idea: try the U.S. Census Bureau. It counts people in lots of ways and could 
be a good place to start.

When she checks around, she finds that the Census Bureau has staff in each regional office called “data dis-
semination specialists” who are there to help census data users find the information they need.40 There are also 
Census Information Centers around the country that specialize in helping those looking for data specifically on 
the American Indian and Alaska Native population.41 

The director learns that the Census Bureau’s continuously updated American Community Survey (ACS) is the 
only federal program that publishes detailed information on the American Indian population in reservation areas. 
She also learns that data from the ACS are available to the public through the Census Bureau’s Web site on the 
data.census.gov platform.42

However, the data.census.gov platform presents its own challenges. It has so much data that finding exactly what 
she wants takes some practice, even with the helpful video tutorials.43 So the director asks an expert to guide her 
through the process.

The first step is to clearly specify the information she is looking for. In this case, the director is looking for: (1) the 
number of persons counted as unemployed and (2) the number counted as being of working age (aged 16 and 
older) but neither employed nor unemployed—or “not in the labor force” in the language of employment statis-
tics. While unemployment statistics are often calculated based on the ratio of unemployed to the labor force, the 
U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs includes people who are available for work, but may not 
be actively looking for work due to barriers to employment. For more information on the challenges of calcu-
lating unemployment and labor force statistics for tribal areas, view the U.S. Department of the Interior’s 2013 
American Indian Population and Labor Force Report.44 

Then there is geography to consider. The numbers that the director needs are those just for people living on the 
reservation. Fortunately, the Census Bureau publishes data for reservation areas. Other sources of employment 
information, such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics, do not.

The director does not want numbers for everyone living on the Standing Rock reservation; roughly 25 per-
cent of persons living on the reservation are not American Indian people. The total numbers of people who are 

40 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Academy, <www.census.gov/data/academy.html>. 
41 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Information Centers, <www.census.gov/about/partners/cic/network.html>. 
42 U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>. 
43 U.S. Census Bureau, Data Gems, <www.census.gov/data/academy/data-gems.html>. 
44 U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, “2013 American Indian Population and Labor Force Report,” <www.bia.gov/sites 

/bia.gov/files/assets/public/pdf/idc1-024782.pdf>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  27 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    27

U.S. Census Bureauunemployed and not in the labor force for the area are not sufficient. She needs to consider only those people on 
the reservation who identify themselves on the ACS questionnaire as American Indian people.

To extract unemployment and not-in-labor-force data from data.census.gov for American Indian people living on 
the Standing Rock reservation, she begins by navigating to <https://data.census.gov> and clicking on “Advanced 
Search” (see Figure 6.1).

  Figure 6.1. Selecting Advanced Search in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

On the Advanced Search page, the director selects “Surveys” and specifies the “ACS 5-Year Estimates Detailed 
Tables,” which include detailed information about the characteristics of people in small geographic areas (see 
Figure 6.2). She confirms that her selected survey is listed as a “Selected Filter” at the bottom of the page.

  Figure 6.2. Selecting Survey in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

28   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

28    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauShe then clicks the “Geography” filter and scrolls down through the different types of geographic areas—the 
nation, state, county, etc.—until she finds the line that reads “American Indian Area/Alaska Native Area/Hawaiian 
Home Land.” Clicking on that line brings up a list of these areas, with reservations listed first, alphabetically by 
reservation name. Here the director could scroll through the list of reservations to find the one she needs, but 
instead she clicks the magnifying glass and starts to type the name of the reservation into the search box at the 
top of the list until “Standing Rock Reservation, SD-ND” appears. She clicks on the box to add the Standing Rock 
Reservation to her selections (see Figures 6.3 and 6.4).

  Figure 6.3. Using the Search Box to Find Geographies in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

 Figure 6.4. Selecting Geographies in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  29 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    29

U.S. Census BureauFinally, she clicks on the “Topics” filter to find the employment table she needs. From the list, she selects 
“Employment” and then marks the box for “Employment and Labor Force Status” (see Figure 6.5).

  Figure 6.5. Selecting Data on Employment in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

From the list of Topics, she then clicks on “Race and Ethnicity” and selects “American Indian and Alaska Native” 
from the list. In the next column, she marks the box for “American Indian and Alaska Native.” Next, she clicks on 
“Search” in the lower right corner of the page (see Figure 6.6).

  Figure 6.6. Selecting Data for American Indian and Alaska Natives in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

30   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

30    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauOn the results page, the director scrolls down the page and clicks on Table C23002C: “Sex by Age by 
Employment Status for the Population 16 Years and Over (American Indian and Alaska Native Alone).” That is the 
table with the employment, unemployment, and not-in-the-labor-force numbers (see Figure 6.7).

  Figure 6.7. Selecting Tables in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

From the table preview page, she clicks on “Customize Table” in the upper right corner (see Figure 6.8).

  Figure 6.8. Previewing Tables in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  31 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    31

U.S. Census BureauA series of filters appear at the top of the screen. She selects the desired survey year by clicking on the cur-
rent “Product” selection. For the purpose of this case study, she is interested in the “2014 ACS 5-Year Estimates 
Detailed Tables” (see Figure 6.9).

  Figure 6.9. Selecting the Survey Year in Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

The resulting table is relatively small, so rather than using the “Download” option at the top of the screen, she 
decides to copy the table directly into her spreadsheet. She clicks on the first cell in the table and then drags her 
mouse to select all of the data cells. Then she right clicks and selects “Copy with Headers” to copy the data and 
column headers to her clipboard (see Figure 6.10).

  Figure 6.10. Copying Data Cells From Data.census.gov

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, <https://data.census.gov>.

32   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

32    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauShe copies the data into her spreadsheet. The first column includes the variable labels, the second column 
includes the estimates, and the third column includes the margins of error. In the spreadsheet, she adds up the 
estimates to find out how many American Indian people on the reservation are unemployed or not in the labor 
force.

To find out the number of unemployed, she sums the following categories:

•  Male: 16 to 64 years: In labor force: Civilian: Unemployed.

•  Male: 65 years and over: In labor force: Unemployed.

•  Female: 16 to 64 years: In labor force: Civilian: Unemployed.

•  Female: 65 years and over: In labor force: Unemployed.

•  Total = 443 + 8 + 333 + 0 = 784.

To find out the number of civilians in the labor force, she sums the following categories:

•  Male: 16 to 64 years: In labor force: Civilian.

•  Male: 65 years and over: In labor force.

•  Female: 16 to 64 years: In labor force: Civilian.

•  Female: 65 years and over: In labor force.

•  Total = 1,102 + 45 + 1,136 + 51 = 2,334.

The resulting estimate of the unemployment rate is 33.6 percent (784 civilian unemployed divided by 2,334 civil-
ians in the labor force). Unfortunately, even at this high level, the unemployment rate does not tell the full story 
of employment challenges on the reservation. To understand the full magnitude of the problem—including those 
not working because they may have barriers to searching for employment—she also estimates the number of 
people not in the labor force.

To find out the number of people not in the labor force, she sums the following categories:

•  Male: 16 to 64 years: Not in labor force.

•  Male: 65 years and over: Not in labor force.

•  Female: 16 to 64 years: Not in labor force.

•  Female: 65 years and over: Not in labor force.

•  Total = 746 + 110 + 763 + 136 = 1,755.

To find out the total number of civilian adults, sum the number of civilians in the labor force (2,334) and the 
number not in the labor force (1,775). The total is 4,089.

Dividing the numbers of people who are unemployed and not in the labor force (784 + 1,755 = 2,539) by the total 
population aged 16 and older (4,089) yields the percentage of people unemployed and not in labor force—62.1 
percent—that the director is looking for.

If she wanted to calculate a similar rate for the population aged 16 to 64, she would add the unemployed and 
not-in-labor-force estimates for men and women aged 16 to 64 (443 + 746 + 333 + 763 = 2,285) and divide that 
by the population aged 16 to 64 (1,848 + 1,899 = 3,747) to get 2,285 / 3,747 = 61.0 percent.

The Employment and Training director can now answer both of her questions about unemployment among 
American Indian people on the reservation. The official unemployment rate among American Indian people on 
the reservation—33.6 percent in 2010–2014—was more than three times the rate for the U.S. population as a 
whole (9.2 percent). However, this 33.6 percent unemployment rate does not include all of the American Indians 
on the reservation who need a job but do not have one.45 Taking into account those who are not in the labor 
force and cannot look for a job until their barriers to employment are resolved—like needing reliable transporta-
tion so that a person living in a remote community on this rural reservation can take a job—the rate jumps to 
over 60 percent. These results based on ACS data provide a useful starting point for those seeking to improve 
conditions for American Indians on the Standing Rock Reservation.

45 Unemployment rate estimate from Table S2301: “Employment Status,” <https://data.census.gov/cedsci/table?q=S2301&hidePreview 

=true&tid=ACSST5Y2014.S2301&vintage=2018&layer=VT_2018_250_00_PY_D1&g=2500000US3970>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  33 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    33

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #2: American Indian and Alaska Native Retirement Security

Skill Level: Intermediate/advanced 
Subject: Retirement security 
Type of Analysis: Analysis of retirement income among American Indians and Alaska Natives 
Tool Used: ACS Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) data 
Author: John Murphy, Social Science Research Analyst, Social Security Administration

The American Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) population faces significant economic challenges, which can play 
a role in the financial resources available in retirement. These challenges include lower average wages and higher 
rates of disability, both of which can reduce the amount of future income available through pensions, savings, 
and Social Security for AIANs. Because there has been little research that has specifically addressed retirement 
income among AIANs, I wanted to compare retirement income among AIANs with that for the total population.

I previously examined retirement outcomes for AIAN communities and other populations using the Health and 
Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS is a rich data source for individuals aged 50 and older with information about 
wealth and retirement for various racial and ethnic groups. However, the HRS sample is far smaller than the ACS 
Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) and is restricted by age. The HRS has about 30,000 respondents, which 
means there are only 300 to 500 AIAN respondents—far too few to conduct a meaningful subanalysis for the 
target group. In comparison, the ACS PUMS data has millions of participants with tens of thousands of AIAN 
respondents.

Because the AIAN community is diverse, with different subgroups exhibiting unique characteristics, I analyzed 
data for three different categories of AIAN respondents:

•  AIAN—A binary (two-category) variable listing a participant as either American Indian/Alaska Native or not, 

based on self-reporting. This recoded variable was taken directly from the PUMS file (variable RACAIAN) and 
includes all respondents who selected American Indian or Alaskan Native alone or in combination with one or 
more other races.

•  Single-race AIAN—A binary, self-reported variable indicating that the respondent listed American Indian or 

Alaskan Native alone for his or her racial identification. This variable is constructed using the RAC1P variable, 
by combining respondents who identified with the following three groups:

o  American Indian alone.

o  Alaska Native alone.

o  American Indian and Alaska Native tribes specified; or American Indian or Alaska native, not specified  
    and no other races.

•  Multiple-race AIAN—A binary, self-reported variable indicating that the respondent listed American Indian or 

Alaskan Native in combination with one or more other races. This variable is derived from the two variables 
listed above (AIAN and Single-race AIAN).

The ACS includes data on a variety of sources of income, including earnings, public assistance, Social Security, 
retirement income, and other sources of income (e.g., dividends, interest, and rental income). 

Annual retirement income is a self-reported, continuous variable denoting the amount of retirement income 
received during the past 12 months, which includes:

1.  Retirement pensions and survivor benefits from a former employer; labor union; or federal, state, or local 

government and the U.S. military.

2.  Disability income from companies or unions; or federal, state, or local government and the U.S. military.

3.  Periodic receipts from annuities and insurance.

4.  Regular income from IRA (individual retirement account) and Keogh plans. This does not include social secu-

rity income.

34   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

34    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauAnnual social security income is a self-reported, continuous variable of social security income for the past 12 
months, which includes benefits received through Social Security’s Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) 
and Disability Insurance (DI) programs. Definitions for these, and other key concepts, can be found in American 
Community Survey Subject Definitions.46 

Accessing and using the PUMS data is pretty simple if you have access to statistical software (e.g., SAS, SPSS, or 
STATA) that you can use to analyze the data. This case study describes how to get the PUMS data you need if 
you are using statistical software. Analysts who do not have statistical software can use the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
new microdata access tool on data.census.gov to generate ACS estimates online without the use of statistical 
software. The Census Bureau created a step-by-step guide on how to use this tool to produce custom estimates 
from the ACS 1-year PUMS file.47 

To download PUMS data, go to the Census Bureau’s “Accessing PUMS Data” Web page (see Figure 6.11).48 Click 
on your desired year of interest from the year 2005 to the present. From here, you can access PUMS data on the 
FTP site or use the microdata analysis tool on data.census.gov. Data prior to 2005 can be found on the Census 
Bureau’s FTP site.49 

  Figure 6.11. Accessing ACS PUMS Data

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Accessing PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs 
-surveys/acs/microdata/access.2018.html>.

46 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey Subject Definitions, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation 

/code-lists.html>. 

47 U.S. Census Bureau, Using Public Microdata to Create Custom Tables on data.census.gov, <www.census.gov/data/academy/webinars/2020 

/using-public-microdata-to-create-custom-tables.html>. 

48 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Accessing PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 

/access.html>. 

49 ACS PUMS data for earlier years are available through the Census Bureau’s FTP site at <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 

/data/pums/>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  35 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    35

U.S. Census BureauFor the purposes of this case study, I used 2018 ACS 5-Year PUMS data because they were the most recent 
5-year data available at the time. The 5-year data also provide a larger pool of AIANs, thus avoiding problems of 
too few respondents for subanalysis. 

Click on "2018 ACS 5-Year PUMS" to access the ACS 5-year PUMS data (see Figure 6.12).50 

  Figure 6.12. Selecting ACS PUMS Files of Interest on the Census Bureau’s FTP Server

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Accessing PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs 
-surveys/acs/microdata/access.2018.html>.

PUMS files on the Census Bureau’s FTP site are stored as ZIP files. The naming convention for PUMS files on the 
FTP server is based on three file features: the file format, the record type, and the state abbreviation.

•  File formats are comma separated value files (CSV), SAS data sets for older PC versions of SAS (PC), or SAS 
datasets for UNIX and recent PC versions of SAS (UNIX) prior to 2010. From 2010 to present, file formats are 
comma separated value files (CSV) and SAS data sets for UNIX.

•  Record types are housing files (h) or person files (p).

•  State (or state equivalent) abbreviations are two letter labels such as “tx” for Texas and “dc” for District of 

Columbia. The abbreviation for the file containing all records in the United States is “us.”

For my study, I used total U.S. population records by selecting “csv_pus.zip” (see Figure 6.13).

  Figure 6.13. Downloading ACS 5-Year PUMS Files From the Census Bureau’s FTP Server

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, FTP server, <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums/2018/5-Year/>.

50 The Census Bureau previously released 3-year estimates based on 36 months of data collection. In 2015, the 3-year products were discon-

tinued. The 2011–2013 ACS 3-year estimates, released in 2014, are the last release of this product. 

36   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

36    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauYou will then need to download a zip file of the data. The 5-year PUMS is divided into “a,” “b,” “c,” and “d” files. It 
may take quite a while to download the file, depending on the size of the file and your Internet connection. (The 
download for my analysis took about 15 minutes.) 

Once I downloaded the file, I used a statistical program to query information about the retirement income for 
each of the race categories described above. To determine which variables contained the data I needed for 
this analysis, I used the PUMS Data Dictionary.51 Using the dictionary, I selected two variables for analysis: (1) 
Retirement income past 12 months (RETP) and (2) Social Security Income past 12 months (SSP). I then used the 
adjustment factor for income variable (ADJINC) to adjust income values for these variables to constant dollars.

Combining income from these two sources provided an estimate of total retirement income during the previous 
12 months. I also limited the population to adults aged 62 and over using the age variable (AGEP).

The preliminary analysis suggests that AIANs have lower retirement incomes than the overall population and 
that single-race AIANs may be particularly at risk of economic insecurity (see Table 6.1).52 However, this research 
is meant to provide a “jumping off point” for researchers and to inform policy makers. More exploration and 
research are warranted to investigate the nuances and obstacles of retirement security among AIANs.

  Table 6.1. Comparison of Mean Retirement Income by Race for the Population Aged 62 and Over: 2014-2018

Race

Mean retirement income

All races

AIAN

  Single-Race AIAN

  MultiRace AIAN

White alone

Black alone

$21,400

$17,900

$16,000

$19,700

$22,400

$18,400

Source: Analysis of the 2014–2018 American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year Public Use Microdata Sample.

An earlier version of this analysis appeared in the report “Retirement Income Among American Indians and 
Alaska Natives in the American Community Survey.” 53

51 U.S. Census Bureau, PUMS Data Dictionary, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata/documentation.html>. 
52 To learn about data quality in the ACS PUMS and how to test whether differences between estimates are statistically significant, refer to 
the section on “Data Quality in the ACS PUMS” in Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files: 
What Data Users Need to Know, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks/pums.html>. 

53 John Murphy and Brent Huggins, “Retirement Income Among American Indians and Alaska Natives in the American Community Survey,” 

Social Security Administration Research and Statistics Note, 2015-01 (2015), <www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/rsnotes/rsn2015-01.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  37 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    37

U.S. Census BureauCase Study #3: National Congress of American Indians Regional Profiles

Skill Level: Intermediate 
Subject: Earnings 
Type of Analysis: Understanding a Demographic Group and Analyses of Trends/Patterns Within a Community 
Tools Used: Census Data API, spreadsheet 
Author: Malia Villegas, Director, Policy Research Center, National Congress of American Indians; Amber Ebarb, 
Budget/Policy Analyst and PRC Program Manager, National Congress of American Indians; and Sarah Pytalksi, 
Policy Research & Evaluation Manager, National Congress of American Indians

The National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) is a nonprofit organization that uses American Community 
Survey (ACS) data at the national, regional, and local level to provide tribal leaders with the best available 
knowledge to make strategically proactive policy decisions. For example, we have produced a series of Regional 
Profiles that combine data from the 2010 Census with more recent information from the ACS to provide informa-
tion about the American Indian and Alaska Native population for 12 regions across the United States (see Figure 
6.14).54 American Indian areas are shown in red on the map. The Regional Profiles provide demographic data and 
information about trends in education, household, and economic characteristics for each region and for indi-
vidual states within those regions.

  Figure 6.14. Twelve Regions of the National Congress of American Indians

Alaska 
Region 

Regions of the National  
Congress of American Indians 
With State and Reservation Land Boundaries 

MT 
Rocky Mountain 
Region 

ND 

Great Plains 
Region 

SD 

WA 

Northwest 
Region 

ID 

OR 

Pacific 
Region 

NV 

UT 

CA 

Western Region 

AZ 

WY 

Southwest 
Region 

CO 

NM 

NE 

IA 

KS 

OK 

MO 

Eastern 
Oklahoma 
Region  

AR 

MN 

Midwest Region 

MI 

WI 

ME 

VT 

NH 

MA 
RI 

CT 

NY 

Northeast 

PA 

NJ 

MD 

WV 

IL 

IN 

OH 

KY 

VA 

TN 
Southeast Region 

NC 

SC 

Southern 
Plains Region 

TX 

MS 

AL 

LA 

GA 

FL 

Visit www.ncai.org to learn more about the National Congress of American Indians. 

Source: National Congress of American Indians, Regional Profiles, <www.ncai.org/resources/ncai-publications 
/regional-profiles>.

54 National Congress of American Indians, Regional Profiles, <www.ncai.org/resources/ncai-publications/regional-profiles>.

38   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

38    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauRegion  
 
We believe that context is important for understanding issues relevant to the American Indian and Alaska Native 
populations. For example, issues relevant to American Indians living on tribal reservations may or may not be rel-
evant to those living in urban areas, and vice versa. Similarly, we may discover an issue that affects Alaska Natives in a 
certain age group, but would be missed by looking at the population as a whole. For this reason, we try to disaggre-
gate data whenever possible by tribal nation, geography, demographic characteristics (e.g., gender or age group), or 
language (e.g., native language speaker or nonspeaker). Accordingly, the Regional Profiles also provide several useful 
comparisons:

•  Comparisons between the American Indian and Alaska Native populations and other groups (e.g., non-Hispanic 

Whites).

•  Comparisons across states within a given region (e.g., Idaho, Oregon, and Washington in the Northwest Region 

profile).

•  Comparisons by place (e.g., on reservation compared with off reservation, urban compared with rural).

•  Comparisons by demographic category (e.g., women versus men, families with and without children).

For many of these comparisons, we rely on data from the ACS. For example, in the Southern Plains and Eastern 
Oklahoma Profile, we used the ACS to compile data on the gender wage gap—the ratio of women’s earnings to men’s 
earnings among full-time, year-round workers.55 

Data on the gender wage gap for American Indian and Alaska Native populations can be accessed through the 
2006–2010 ACS Selected Population Tables in the Census Data API.56

To find the variables you need, refer to the Census Data API Discovery Tool.57 Select the HTML format link to view the 
available API data sets on the Census Bureau’s Web site (see Figure 6.15).

  Figure 6.15. Census Data API Discovery Tool

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census Data API Discovery Tool, <www.census.gov/data/developers/updates/new-discovery 
-tool.html>.

55 National Congress of American Indians, Regional Profiles, Southern Plains and Eastern Oklahoma Profile, <www.ncai.org/policy-research 

-center/research-data/prc-publications/Southern_Plains_and_Eastern.pdf>. 

56 U.S. Census Bureau, Race/Ethnicity and American Indian & Alaska Native Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/race 

-aian.2010.html>. 

57 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Data API Discovery Tool, <www.census.gov/data/developers/updates/new-discovery-tool.html>. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  39 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    39

U.S. Census BureauTo find a data set of interest, scroll through the list or search your Web browser for a specific year or phrase (for 
example, “2010” or “Selected Population Tables”). Select the link for “variables” to view a list of all the variables 
available in the data set (see Figure 6.16).

  Figure 6.16. Selecting a List of Variables in the Census Data API

Note: Data are only displayed for selected rows. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census API: Datasets, <https://api.census.gov/data.html>.

Scroll through the list of variables to find the desired variables for men’s earnings (B20017_003E) and women’s 
earnings (B20017_006E) among full-time, year-round workers. You will use these variables and their associated 
margins of error, B20017_003M and B20017_006M, to create your API query (see Figure 6.17).

  Figure 6.17. Identifying Variables for an API Query

Note: Data are only displayed for selected rows. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census API: Variables, <https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt/variables.html>.

40   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

40    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauNow that you know the required API query variables, revisit the list of data sets available in the Census Data API 
and select “examples” to view a list of example API queries (see Figure 6.18).

  Figure 6.18 Finding Example Queries in the Census Data API

Note: Data are only displayed for selected rows. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census API: Datasets, <https://api.census.gov/data.html>.

For this example, data are needed for specific states (Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas), so you can use the state 
example URL to start creating a query (see Figure 6.19).

  Figure 6.19. Selecting Example Queries in the Census Data API

Note: Data are only displayed for selected rows. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Census API: Examples <https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt/examples.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  41 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    41

U.S. Census BureauTo access a 2006–2010 ACS Selected Population Table on the gender wage gap among American Indian/Alaskan 
Native and non-Hispanic White subpopulations in Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas, enter the following query in your 
Web browser: "https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt?get=B20017_003E,B20017_006E,B20017_003M 
,B20017_006M,POPGROUP_TTL,NAME&for=state:20,40,48&POPGROUP=451&POPGROUP=455%22" as 
described in the steps below.

1.  Start your query with the host name: “https://api.census.gov/data.”

2.  Add the data year (2010) to the URL: “https://api.census.gov/data/2010.”

3.  Add the data set name acronym for the ACS 5-Year Selected Population Tables, and follow this base URL 

with a question mark: “https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt?.”

4.  Add the required variables, starting with a “get” clause: “https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt?get 

=B20017_003E,B20017_006E,B20017_003M,B20017_006M.”

5.  To select data for Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas, you need to specify the codes for these areas in your query. 

The Census Data API supports Federal Information Processing Series (FIPS) codes and Geographic Names 
Informational System (GNIS) codes. You can find the FIPS codes for these states on the Census Bureau’s 
Geographies Web page. 58 Then add the state codes for Kansas (20), Oklahoma (40), and Texas (48) to the 
URL, separated by commas. In this data set, the variable called NAME provides the name of the geographic 
areas that you are using to limit your search, and the “for” predicate (&for) restricts the data to the state 
level: “https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt?get=B20017_003E,B20017_006E,B20017_003M 
,B20017_006M,POPGROUP_TTL,NAME&for=state:20,40,48.”

6.  Next, you need to specify the required racial/ethnic groups. Use the POPGROUP variable to specify the 

codes for the population groups and use POPGROUP_TTL to specify the names of the population groups, as 
shown in the list of variables for the 2010 ACS 5-Year Selected Population Tables.59 You can find the relevant 
codes by entering the following API query in your Web browser: “https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5 
/spt?get=POPGROUP,POPGROUP_TTL,NAME&for=us:*.”

By scrolling through the results of this query, you find that the POPGROUP code for White alone, not Hispanic 
or Latino is “451,” and the code for American Indian and Alaska Native alone, not Hispanic or Latino is “455” (see 
Figure 6.20).

  Figure 6.20. Identifying Racial/Ethnic Codes for an API Query

Note: Data are only displayed for selected rows. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt?get=POPGROUP,POPGROUP_TTL,NAME&for=us:*>.

58 U.S. Census Bureau, Geographies, Reference Files, <www.census.gov/geographies/reference-files.html>. 
59 U.S. Census Bureau, Census Data API: Variables, <https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt/variables.html>. 

42   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

42    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau7.  Now that you know the correct racial/ethnic codes, you can complete your query: “https://api.census.gov 

/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt?get=B20017_003E,B20017_006E,B20017_003M,B20017_006M,POPGROUP_TTL 
,NAME&for=state:20,40,48&POPGROUP=451&POPGROUP=455.”

From your browser, you can then save the query results as a CSV file. Here are the steps to open your query 
results in a spreadsheet:

1.  Right click on the page and select “Save as” (see Figure 6.21).

  Figure 6.21. Saving the API Query Results

Source: U.S. Census Bureau,  
<https://api.census.gov/data/2010/acs/acs5/spt?get=B20017_003E,B20017_006E,B20017_003M,B20017_006M 
,POPGROUP_TTL,NAME&for=state:20,40,48&POPGROUP=451&POPGROUP=455>.

2.  Save the page as a CSV file by adding “.csv” at the end of the file name and selecting “All Files” as the file 

type (see Figure 6.22).

  Figure 6.22. Saving the Results as a CSV File

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  43 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    43

U.S. Census Bureau3.  Open the CSV file in a spreadsheet for further analysis of the query results (see Figure 6.23).

  Figure 6.23. Opening the API Query Results

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

We took the data and calculated the earnings ratio for each state and for each demographic group, and we used 
these data to create a chart that compares the 12 categories (three states, two racial/ethnic groups, and two 
gender groups). On the chart, we also showed the margin of error for each estimate, which is included in each 
of the tables we downloaded (see Figure 6.24). The margin of error provides a measure of reliability for a given 
estimate.

  Figure 6.24. Gender Earnings Gap for American Indian and Alaska Natives and Non-Hispanic  
                    Whites in Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas: 2006–2010

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2006–2010 American Community Survey Selected Population Tables, Table B20017.

We produced similar analyses for a variety of other topics, including educational attainment, poverty, employ-
ment, homeownership, and median home values.

44   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

44    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauPolicy Applications of the Data

This case study demonstrates how ACS data can be used to provide tribal leaders with the data they need for 
decision-making. The Regional Profiles were developed by the NCAI in response to a request from our Executive 
Board to provide clearer demographic and economic portraits of the communities and regions beyond their 
own. These communities are being called upon to testify before Congress as national leaders and as representa-
tives of Indian Country as a whole—not only for their respective tribal communities. Since their release, these 
Regional Profiles have been used by regional intertribal organizations, tribal Community Development Financial 
Institutions (CDFI), as well as tribal program administrators engaged with YouthBuild in their efforts to advocate 
for federal funding, increase data collection, apply for grants, and educate policy makers at state and federal 
levels. 

One of the first explicit data requests the NCAI Policy Research Center received came from the Executive 
Director of the United Southern and Eastern Tribes, who needed economic data for the entire eastern region. He 
was amazed that within 5 minutes of his request, we had printed a copy of the Eastern Regional Data Profile with 
the exact information that he and his staff were seeking. Conveniently, he was heading to testify on Capitol Hill 
later that afternoon and he quickly amended his prepared comments to include several data points.

Another request came from the Executive Director of the Native CDFI Network, who was eager to incorporate 
economic data in grant proposals and funding requests to private and federal partners. She knew how critical 
data would be in telling the story of economic disparity and the lack of access to capital so many of the com-
munities across Indian Country face—and how the Native CDFIs are poised to meet and fill those resource gaps. 
She was thrilled to realize that the Regional Profiles had been produced and that they covered topics, such as 
housing and broadband connectivity, in addition to employment and income information. She immediately dis-
seminated the profiles to their respective CDFI regional representatives within her network.

Finally, various tribal program administrators met with NCAI and the U.S. Department of Labor to determine 
what more could be done to secure access to funding through the YouthBuild program. When they were told 
how heavily data and evaluation were factored into competitive applications, many administrators expressed 
frustration that their programs did not have sufficient capacity to collect and analyze data to the extent required. 
The NCAI Policy Research Center shared the Regional Profiles as a resource, and the representatives took great 
comfort in having these baseline ACS data about the communities within their state and how they compared to 
non-Native populations—enabling them to highlight the need for increased investment in workforce develop-
ment and economic opportunity.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  45 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    45

U.S. Census Bureau7. UNDERSTANDING ERROR AND DETERMINING  
STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE

Sources of Error

The data in American Community Survey (ACS) products are estimates of the actual figures that would have 
been obtained if the entire population—rather than the chosen ACS sample—had been interviewed using the 
same methodology. All estimates produced from sample surveys have uncertainty associated with them as a 
result of being based on a sample of the population rather than the full population. This uncertainty—called sam-
pling error—means that estimates derived from the ACS will likely differ from the values that would have been 
obtained if the entire population had been included in the survey, as well as from values that would have been 
obtained had a different set of sample units been selected for the survey. 

Sampling error is the difference between an estimate based on a sample and the corresponding value that would 
be obtained if the estimate were based on the entire population. Measures of the magnitude of sampling error 
reflect the variation in the estimates over all possible samples that could have been selected from the population 
using the same sampling methodology. The margin of error is the measure of the magnitude of sampling error 
provided with all published ACS estimates.

In addition to sampling error, data users should recognize that other types of error—called nonsampling 
error—might also be introduced during any of the complex operations used to collect and process ACS data. 
Nonsampling error can result from problems in the sampling frame or survey questionnaires, mistakes in how 
the data are reported or coded, issues related to data processing or weighting, or problems related to inter-
viewer bias or nonresponse bias. Nonresponse bias results when survey respondents differ in meaningful ways 
from nonrespondents. Nonsampling error may affect ACS data by increasing the variability of the estimates or 
introducing bias into ACS results. The U.S. Census Bureau tries to minimize nonsampling error through exten-
sive research and evaluation of sampling techniques, questionnaire design, and data collection and processing 
procedures. 

Nonsampling error is very difficult to measure directly, but the Census Bureau provides a number of indirect 
measures to help inform users about the quality of ACS estimates. The section on “Measures of Nonsampling 
Error” includes a more detailed description of the different types of nonsampling error in the ACS and mea-
sures of ACS data quality. More information on ACS data quality measures for the nation and individual states is 
available on the Census Bureau’s Web page on Sample Size and Data Quality.60  

Measures of Sampling Error

Margins of Error and Confidence Intervals

A margin of error (MOE) describes the precision of an ACS estimate at a given level of confidence. The confi-
dence level associated with the MOE indicates the likelihood that the ACS sample estimate is within a certain 
range (the MOE) of the population value. The MOEs for published ACS estimates are provided at a 90 percent 
confidence level. From these MOEs, data users can easily calculate 90 percent confidence intervals that define 
a range expected to contain the true or population value of an estimate 90 percent of the time. For example, 
in the Data Profile for Selected Social Characteristics (Table DP02) for Colorado, a portion of which is shown 
in Figure 7.1, data from the 2015 ACS 1-year estimates indicate that there were 564,757 one-person households 
in the state in 2015 with an MOE of 10,127. By adding and subtracting the MOE from the point estimate, we can 
calculate the 90 percent confidence interval for that estimate: 

564,757 – 10,127 = 554,630 = Lower bound of the interval

564,757 + 10,127 = 574,884 = Upper bound of the interval

60 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Sample Size and Data Quality, <www.census.gov/acs/www/methodology/sample-size 

-and-data-quality/>.

46   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

46    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau  Figure 7.1. Sample Estimates and Margins of Error in Data.census.gov: 2015

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table DP02: “Selected Social Characteristics in the United States.”

Therefore, we can be 90 percent confident that the true number of one-person households in Colorado in 2015 
falls somewhere between 554,630 and 574,884. Put another way, if the ACS were independently conducted 100 
times in 2015, sampling theory suggests that 90 times the estimate of one-person households in Colorado would 
fall in the given confidence interval. Estimates with smaller MOEs—relative to the value of the estimate—will have 
narrower confidence intervals indicating that the estimate is more precise and has less sampling error associated 
with it.  

TIP: When constructing confidence intervals from MOEs, data users should be aware of any “natural” limits 
on the upper and lower bounds. For example, if a population estimate is near zero, the calculated value of the 
lower confidence bound may be less than zero. However, a negative number of people does not make sense, so 
the lower confidence bound should be reported as zero instead. 

For other estimates, such as income, negative values may be valid. Another natural limit would be 100 percent 
for the upper confidence bound of a percent estimate. Data users should always keep the context and meaning 
of an estimate in mind when creating and interpreting confidence intervals.

Standard Errors and Coefficients of Variation

A standard error (SE) measures the variability of an estimate due to sampling and provides the basis for calculat-
ing the MOE. The SE provides a quantitative measure of the extent to which an estimate derived from a sample 
can be expected to deviate from the value for the full population. SEs are needed to calculate coefficients of 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  47 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    47

U.S. Census Bureauvariation and to conduct tests of statistical significance. Data users can easily calculate the SE of an ACS estimate 
by dividing the positive value of its MOE by 1.645 as shown below:61

Using the data in Table 7.1, the SE for the number of one-person households in Colorado in 2015 would be:

(1)

The SE for an estimate depends on the underlying variability in the population for that characteristic and the 
sample size used for the survey. In general, the larger the sample size, the smaller the SE of the estimates pro-
duced from the sample data. This relationship between sample size and SE is the reason that ACS estimates for 
less populous areas are only published using multiple years of data. Combining data from multiple ACS 1-year 
files increases sample size and helps to reduce SEs.

Coefficients of variation are another useful measure of sampling error. A coefficient of variation (CV) measures 
the relative amount of sampling error that is associated with a sample estimate. The CV is calculated as the ratio 
of the SE for an estimate to the estimate itself 

 and is usually expressed as a percent:

A small CV indicates that the SE is small relative to the estimate, and a data user can be more confident that the 
estimate is close to the population value. The CV is also an indicator of the reliability of an estimate. When the SE 
of an estimate is close to the value of the estimate, the CV will be larger, indicating that the estimate has a large 
amount of sampling error associated with it and is not very reliable. For the example of one-person households in 
Colorado, the CV would be calculated as:62  

(2)

A CV of 1.1 percent indicates that the ACS estimate of one-person households in Colorado has a relatively small 
amount of sampling error and is quite reliable. Data users often find it easier to interpret and compare CVs across 
a series of ACS estimates than to interpret and compare SEs.

There are no hard-and-fast rules for determining an acceptable range of error in ACS estimates. Instead, data users 
must evaluate each application to determine the level of precision that is needed for an ACS estimate to be useful. 
For more information, visit the Census Bureau’s Web page on Data Suppression.63

Determining Statistical Significance

One of the most important uses of ACS data is to make comparisons between estimates—across different geo-
graphic areas, different time periods, or different population subgroups. Data users may also want to compare 
ACS estimates with data from past decennial censuses. For any comparisons based on ACS data, it is important 
to take into account the sampling error associated with each estimate through the use of a statistical test for 
significance. This test shows whether the observed difference between estimates likely represents a true differ-
ence that exists within the full population (is statistically significant) or instead has occurred by chance because 

61 Data users working with ACS 1-year estimates for 2005 or earlier should divide the MOE by the value 1.65 as that was the value used to   

derive the published MOE from the SE in those years.

62 The examples provided in this section use unrounded values in their calculations, but the values displayed are rounded to three decimal 
places. For percentages that use a numerator or denominator from a prior example, the unrounded value is used, although the rounded value is 
displayed.

63 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Data Suppression, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation 

/data-suppression.html>.

48   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

48    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau                  
                                                    
 
                    
of sampling (is not statistically significant). Statistical significance means that there is strong statistical evidence 
that a true difference exists within the full population. Data users should not rely on overlapping confidence inter-
vals as a test for statistical significance because this method will not always provide an accurate result.

When comparing two ACS estimates, a test for significance can be carried out by making several calculations 
using the estimates and their corresponding SEs. These calculations are straightforward given the published 
MOEs available for ACS estimates in data.census.gov and many other Census Bureau data products. The steps to 
test for a statistically significant difference between two ACS estimates are as follows:

1.  Calculate the SEs for the two ACS estimates using formula (1).
2.  Square the resulting SE for each estimate.
3.  Sum the squared SEs.
4.  Calculate the square root of the sum of the squared SEs.
5.  Divide the difference between the two ACS estimates by the square root of the sum of the squared SEs.
6.  Compare the absolute value of the result from Step 5 with the critical value for the desired level of confi-

7. 

dence (1.645 for 90 percent, 1.960 for 95 percent, or 2.576 for 99 percent).
If the absolute value of the result from Step 5 is greater than the critical value, then the difference between 
the two estimates can be considered statistically significant, at the level of confidence corresponding to the 
critical value selected in Step 6.

Algebraically, the significance test can be expressed as follows:

If

(3)

then the difference between estimates 
level (CL)

 and 

 is statistically significant at the specified confidence  

 are the estimates being compared 

where 
 and 
SE1 is the SE for estimate 
SE2 is the SE for estimate 

ZCL is the critical value for the desired confidence level (1.645 for 90 percent, 1.960 for 95 percent, and 2.576 for 
99 percent).

The example below shows how to determine if the difference in the estimated percentage of householders age 
65 or older who live alone between Florida (estimated percentage = 12.6, MOE = 0.2) and Arizona (estimated 
percentage = 10.5, MOE = 0.3) is statistically significant, based on 2015 ACS data. Using formula (1) above, first 
calculate the corresponding standard errors for Florida (0.122) and Arizona (0.182) by dividing the MOEs by 
1.645. Then, using formula (3) above, calculate the test value as follows:

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  49 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    49

U.S. Census Bureau 
Since the test value (9.581) is greater than the critical value for a confidence level of 90 percent (1.645), the dif-
ference in the percentages is statistically significant at a 90 percent confidence level. A rough interpretation of 
the result is that the user can be 90 percent certain that a difference exists between the percentage of house-
holders aged 65 or older who live alone in Florida and in Arizona.

By contrast, if the corresponding estimate for Indiana (estimated percentage = 10.8, MOE = 0.2, SE = 0.122) were 
compared with the estimate for Arizona, formula (3) would yield:

Since the test value (1.369) is less than the critical value for a confidence level of 90 percent (1.645), the differ-
ence in percentages is not statistically significant. A rough interpretation of the result is that the user cannot be 
certain to any sufficient degree that the observed difference in the estimates between Indiana and Arizona was 
not due to chance.

The Census Bureau has produced a Statistical Testing Tool to make it easier for ACS data users to conduct tests 
of statistical significance when comparing ACS estimates.64 This tool consists of an Excel spreadsheet that will 
automatically calculate statistical significance when data users are comparing two ACS estimates or multiple 
estimates. Data users simply need to download ACS data from the Census Bureau’s data.census.gov Web site 
and insert the estimate and MOE into the correct columns and cells in the spreadsheet. The results are calculated 
automatically. The result “Yes” indicates that estimates are statistically different and the result “No” indicates the 
estimates are not statistically different.65

Custom (User-Derived) Estimates

In some cases, data users will need to construct custom ACS estimates by combining data across multiple geo-
graphic areas or population subgroups, or it may be necessary to derive a new percentage, proportion, or ratio 
from published ACS data. For example, one way to address the issue of unreliable estimates for individual census 
tracts or block groups is to aggregate geographic areas, yielding larger samples and more reliable estimates. 
In such cases, additional calculations are needed to produce MOEs and SEs, and to conduct tests of statistical 
significance for the derived estimates. The section on “Calculating Measures of Error for Derived Estimates” pro-
vides detailed instructions on how to make these calculations. 

64 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Statistical Testing Tool, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 

/statistical-testing-tool.html>.

65 This tool only conducts statistical testing on the estimates keyed in by the data user for comparison within the spreadsheet, and it does not 

adjust the MOE when making multiple comparisons, nor incorporate a Bonferroni correction or any other method in the results of the statistical 
testing.

50   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

50    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauAdvanced users who are aggregating ACS estimates can use the Census Bureau’s Variance Replicate Tables 
to produce MOEs for selected ACS 5-year Detailed Tables.66 Users can calculate MOEs for aggregated data by 
using the variance replicates. Unlike available approximation formulas, this method results in an exact MOE by 
incorporating the covariance. More information about the Variance Replicate Tables is available in the section on 
“Calculating Measures of Error for Derived Estimates.”

Some advanced data users will also want to construct custom ACS estimates from the Census Bureau’s Public 
Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) files. Separate instructions for calculating SEs and conducting significance tests 
for PUMS estimates are available on the Census Bureau’s PUMS Technical Documentation Web page.67

It is important for data users to remember that the error measures and statistical tests described in this sec-
tion do not tell us about the magnitude of nonsampling errors. More information about those types of errors is 
available in the section on “Measures of Nonsampling Error.” 

Additional Background Information and Tools

Sample Size and Data Quality 
<www.census.gov/acs/www/methodology/sample-size-and-data-quality/> 
This Web page describes the steps the Census Bureau takes to ensure that ACS data are accurate and reliable. It 
also includes several measures of ACS data quality for the nation and states.

Statistical Testing Tool 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/statistical-testing-tool.html>  
The Statistical Testing Tool is a spreadsheet that tests whether ACS estimates are statistically different from one 
another. Simply copy or download ACS estimates and their MOEs into the tool to get instant results of statistical 
tests.

Variance Replicate Tables 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/variance-tables.html>  
Variance replicate estimate tables include estimates, MOEs, and 80 variance replicates for selected ACS 5-year 
Detailed Tables. The tables are intended for advanced users who are aggregating ACS data within a table or 
across geographic areas. Unlike available approximation formulas, this method results in an exact MOE by 
incorporating the covariance.

66 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Variance Replicate Tables, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/variance 

-tables.html>.

67 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS Technical Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 

/technical-documentation/pums/documentation.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  51 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    51

U.S. Census Bureau8. CALCULATING MEASURES OF ERROR FOR 
DERIVED ESTIMATES

The U.S. Census Bureau publishes a wide range of American Community Survey (ACS) estimates through the data 
products provided in data.census.gov and the ACS Summary File. However, for some applications, data users may 
still need to construct custom ACS estimates and their associated margins of error (MOEs). For example, users 
may want to aggregate data across geographic areas or population subgroups, or may need to derive proportions, 
ratios, and percent change measures that are not provided in published ACS data products. 

TIP: Data users can also aggregate data across geographic areas—or across population subgroups—to produce 
more reliable estimates in cases where the underlying component areas have estimates with relatively large 
standard errors (SEs).

When such derived estimates are generated, the user must calculate the associated MOEs. As described in the 
section on “Understanding Error and Determining Statistical Significance,” MOEs are needed to calculate SEs 
and coefficients of variation (CVs) and to determine statistical significance. The steps outlined in the sections 
below illustrate how to calculate the MOEs for derived counts, proportions, percentages, ratios, and percent 
change, which can then be translated into SEs and CVs. 

Calculating Measures of Error for Aggregated Count Data

Aggregating Data Across Geographic Areas

For some applications, data users may want to know the number of people with certain characteristics within a 
particular geographic region that is not included as a standard geographic area in ACS products. For example, 
a user may be interested in the number of never-married females within a tri-county area. The example below 
shows how to calculate the MOE, SE, and CV for such a derived estimate.     

To calculate the MOE for aggregated count data:

1.  Obtain the MOE of each component estimate.
2.  Square the MOE of each component estimate.
3.  Sum the squared MOEs.
4.  Take the square root of the sum of the squared MOEs.
The result is the MOE for the aggregated count. Algebraically, the MOE for the aggregated count is calculated 
as:

The example below shows how to calculate the MOE and SE for the estimated number of never-married 
females living in the three Virginia counties/independent cities that border Washington, DC (Fairfax and 
Arlington counties, Alexandria City) from the 2015 ACS 1-year estimates as shown in Table 8.1.

 Table 8.1. Data for Example 1 From Three Virginia Counties/Independent Cities: 2015

Characteristic

Never-married females living in Fairfax County  
 (Component 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Never-married females living in Arlington County 
 (Component 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Never-married females living in Alexandria City 
(Component 3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Estimate

135,173

43,104

24,842

  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table B12001: “Sex by Marital Status for the Population 15 Years and Over.”

52   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

52    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

(1)

MOE

±3,860

±2,642

±1,957

U.S. Census Bureau 
The aggregate estimate is:

Obtain MOEs of the component estimates:

 MOE (Fairfax)       = ±3,860
 MOE (Arlington)   = ±2,642 
MOE (Alexandria) = ±1,957

Using formula (1), calculate the MOE for the aggregate estimate:

Thus, the derived estimate of the number of never-married females living in the three Virginia counties/indepen-
dent cities that border Washington, DC, is 203,119, and the MOE for the estimate is ±5,070. 

The SE of this derived estimate can be calculated from the SEs of the component estimates as follows:

1. Calculate the SE of each component estimate from its MOE using:  

SE (Fairfax)       = 3,860 / 1.645 = 2,347
SE (Arlington)   = 2,642 / 1.645 = 1,606
         SE (Alexandria)   = 1,957 / 1.645 = 1,190

2. Calculate the SE of the aggregate estimate:

With the three component estimates in this example, this becomes:

To assess the reliability of this derived estimate, users may find it helpful to calculate the CV as follows:

(2)

(3)

(4)

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  53 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    53

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
This CV indicates that the sampling error of this estimate is very small relative to the estimate itself, so the num-
ber of never-married females residing in the Virginia tri-county area bordering Washington, DC, can be consid-
ered a very reliable estimate. 

However, users should note that this method for calculating the MOE and SE for aggregated count data is an 
approximation, and caution is warranted because this method does not consider the correlation or covariance 
between the component estimates. This method may result in an overestimate or underestimate of the derived 
estimate’s SE depending on whether the component estimates are highly correlated in either a positive or nega-
tive direction. As a result, the approximated SE may not match the result from a direct calculation of the SE that 
does include a measure of covariance, such as the following:

(5)

Data users should also be aware that as the number of estimates involved in a sum or difference increases, the 
results of the approximation formula become increasingly different from the SE derived directly from the ACS 
microdata. Users are encouraged to work with the fewest number of estimates possible. If there are estimates 
involved in a sum that are controlled in the weighting, then the approximate SE can be increasingly different. 
Several examples are provided to demonstrate issues associated with approximating the SEs when summing 
large numbers of estimates together in the latest ACS Worked Examples for Approximating Margins of Error 
document.68

Aggregating Data Across Population Subgroups

For some applications, data users may wish to combine data across population subgroups, especially in ACS 
tables where some groups have low counts and large MOEs. Before aggregating categories in a Detailed Table 
to create a derived estimate, users should check to make sure there is not a collapsed version of the same table 
already available in data.census.gov or the ACS Summary File. The MOEs in the published, collapsed tables will 
be more accurate than those users can approximate using the methods described in this section. 

The example below illustrates the results from aggregating household income categories from a Detailed Table in 
data.census.gov for Loudoun County, Virginia, from the 2015 ACS 1-year estimates. Income categories are orga-
nized into three subgroups for the purpose of this example.

68 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Worked Examples for Approximating Margins of Error, <www.census.gov 

/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/code-lists.html>.

54   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

54    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau  Table 8.2. Data for Examp

le 2 From Loudou

n County, Virginia: 2015

Household  
income category

Subgroup #

Estimate

  Less than $10,000 . . . . . . .

  $10,000 to $14,999 . . . . . .

  $15,000 to $19,999 . . . . . .

  $20,000 to $24,999 . . . . . .

  $25,000 to $29,999 . . . . . .

  $30,000 to $34,999 . . . . . .

  $35,000 to $39,999 . . . . . .

  $40,000 to $44,999 . . . . . .

  $45,000 to $49,999 . . . . . .

  $50,000 to $59,999 . . . . . .

  $60,000 to $74,999 . . . . . .

  $75,000 to $99,999 . . . . . .

  $100,000 to $124,999 . . . .

  $125,000 to $149,999 . . . .

  $150,000 to $199,999 . . . .

  $200,000 or more  . . . . . . .

–

–

1

1

2

2

3

3

3

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

2,163

1,178

1,502

1,995

1,756

1,781

2,708

1,981

2,581

6,590

6,861

14,391

14,790

12,735

18,167

29,380

MOE

±812

±504

±743

±722

±685

±631

±1,007

±647

±996

±1,109

±1,288

±1,810

±1,944

±1,341

±1,890

±2,053

SE

494

306

452

439

416

384

612

393

605

674

783

1,100

1,182

815

1,149

1,248

CV

22.8

26.0

30.1

22.0

23.7

21.5

22.6

19.9

23.5

10.2

11.4

7.6

8.0

6.4

6.3

4.2

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table B19001: “Household Income in the Past 12 Months (In 2015 Inflation-Adjusted Dollars).”

After calculating the SEs and CVs shown in Table 8.2, a data user might want to combine some of the household 
income categories in the lower end of the income distribution to reduce the CVs and create more reliable esti-
mates. For example, the income categories in Subgroup 1 ($15,000 to $19,999 and $20,000 to $24,999) could be 
combined to form the first new subgroup, the two in Subgroup 2 ($25,000 to $29,999 and $30,000 to $34,999) 
to form a second new subgroup, and the three in Subgroup 3 ($35,000 to $39,999, $40,000 to $44,999, and 
$45,000 to $49,999) to form a third new subgroup. Following the same steps used to combine data across three 
geographic areas in Example 1, derived estimates and MOEs for the three new subgroups could be calculated as 
follows:

1.  Aggregate counts to form new subgroup estimates:

•  Subgroup 1 ($15,000 to $24,999) = 1,502 + 1,995 = 3,497 
•  Subgroup 2 ($25,000 to $34,999) = 1,756 + 1,781 = 3,537
•  Subgroup 3 ($35,000 to $49,999) = 2,708 + 1,981 + 2,581 = 7,270

2.  Using formula (1), calculate MOEs for each new subgroup estimate:

MOE (Subgroup 1) = ±√(743)

2

2

+ (722)

= ±√1,073,333 = ±1,036

MOE (Subgroup 2) = ±√(685)

2

2

+ (631)

= ±√867,386 = ±931

MOE (Subgroup 3) = ±√(1,007)

+ (996)
Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  55 

+ (647)

=

2

2

2

±√2,424,674 = ±1,557

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    55

MOE(Q̂) = 100  ∗ [

630,498

2

2

2

√(5,070)

− [(0.322)

∗ (831)

]] = 0.8%

MOE(X̂1 + X̂2 + X̂3) = ±√(391)

+ (572)

+ (459)

= ±√690,746 = ±831

2

2

2

MOE(P̂) =

√[MOE(X̂)]

− (P̂

∗ [MOE(Ŷ)]

)

2

2

2 

1

1

Ŷ

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MOE (Subgroup 1) = ±√(743)

MOE (Subgroup 1) = ±√(743)

MOE (Subgroup 1) = ±√(743)
2
2
+ (631)
+ (631)

MOE (Subgroup 2) = ±√(685)

MOE (Subgroup 2) = ±√(685)

MOE (Subgroup 2) = ±√(685)

2

2

2

2
2
+ (722)
+ (722)

MOE (Subgroup 3) = ±√(1,007)

MOE (Subgroup 3) = ±√(1,007)

MOE (Subgroup 3) = ±√(1,007)

2
= ±√1,073,333 = ±1,036

2
= ±√1,073,333 = ±1,036

2
+ (722)
2
= ±√867,386 = ±931

2
= ±√867,386 = ±931

= ±√1,073,333 = ±1,036

+ (631)
2
2
2
+ (647)
+ (647)

= ±√867,386 = ±931
2
+ (647)

2
2
+ (996)
+ (996)
=

2
+ (996)

2
=

=

2

±√2,424,674 = ±1,557
3.  Calculate the SE of each new subgroup estimate using formula (2): 

±√2,424,674 = ±1,557

±√2,424,674 = ±1,557

•  SE (Subgroup 1)    = 1,036 / 1.645 = 630
•  SE (Subgroup 2)   = 931 / 1.645 = 566
•  SE (Subgroup 3)   = 1,557 / 1.645 = 947
MOE(Q̂) = 100  ∗ [

MOE(Q̂) = 100  ∗ [

1
1
1
√(5,070)
MOE(Q̂) = 100  ∗ [
− [(0.322)
630,498
630,498
4.  Using formula (4), calculate the CV for each new subgroup estimate:
630,498
2
2
•  CV (Subgroup 1)  = (630 / 3,497) * 100 = (0.180) * 100 = 18.0 percent
MOE(X̂1 + X̂2 + X̂3) = ±√(391)
2
+ (572)
+ (572)
MOE(X̂1 + X̂2 + X̂3) = ±√(391)
•  CV (Subgroup 2) = (566 / 3,537) * 100 = (0.160) * 100 = 16.0 percent
•  CV (Subgroup 3) = (947 / 7,270) * 100 = (0.130) * 100 = 13.0 percent  
2 

MOE(X̂1 + X̂2 + X̂3) = ±√(391)

2
2
+ (459)
+ (459)

2
− [(0.322)

2
− [(0.322)

√(5,070)

√(5,070)

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2
∗ (831)
∗ (831)

2
]] = 0.8%
]] = 0.8%

∗ (831)

]] = 0.8%

2
= ±√690,746 = ±831

2
= ±√690,746 = ±831

+ (572)
2
2
2
2
2
− (P̂
∗ [MOE(Ŷ)]
− (P̂
Aggregating across income categories increases the reliability of the new subgroup estimates relative to the 
− (P̂
original component estimates. For example, the CV for the $15,000 to $19,999 category is 30 percent. When 
this category is combined with the $20,000 to $24,999 category, the CV for the derived estimate for the new 
Subgroup 1 drops to 18 percent—lower than the original CV for this category by itself. Similarly, the CVs for the 
component estimates of Subgroup 3 range from 20 percent to 24 percent, while the CV for the derived estimate 
for Subgroup 3 ($35,000 to $49,999) is only 13 percent.

1
√[MOE(X̂)]
MOE(P̂) =
Ŷ

= ±√690,746 = ±831
2 

√[MOE(X̂)]
1
Ŷ

2 
)
∗ [MOE(Ŷ)]

1
MOE(P̂) =
Ŷ

√[MOE(X̂)]

∗ [MOE(Ŷ)]
2
)

MOE(P̂) =

+ (459)

)

Data.census.gov includes a collapsed income distribution within Demographic Profile DP03 that makes it possi-
ble to assess the difference in results from the approximation method illustrated above versus a direct estimation 
method that accounts for covariance between the component estimates of the subgroups. The relevant portion 
of this data.census.gov table, from the 2015 ACS 1-year estimates, is shown in Table 8.3 below.

 Table 8.3. Data From Demographic Profile DP03 for Loudoun County, Virginia: 2015

Household  
income category

$15,000 to $24,999 . . . .

$25,000 to $34,999 . . . .

$35,000 to $49,999 . . . .

Subgroup #

Estimate

MOE

1

2

3

3,497

3,537

7,270

±1,037

±973

±1,554

 Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table DP03: “Selected Economic Characteristics.”

SE

630

591

945

CV

18.0

16.7

13.0

While the MOEs, SEs, and CVs for new Subgroup 1 and Subgroup 3 are almost identical to those derived from the 
approximation method, this is not the case for new Subgroup 2. The user-derived MOE is ±931 compared with 
the published MOE of ±973, and the derived CV is only 16.0 percent compared with a CV of 16.7 percent based 
on the published MOE for Subgroup 2. The approximation method slightly underestimates the MOE and SE for 
Subgroup 2 because it does not account for some covariance between the two component estimates. Although 
the differences between the user-derived and published MOE’s are small in this example, they can vary substan-
tially in other cases, particularly for linear combinations of multiple estimates. Examples illustrating this problem 
are provided in the ACS Worked Examples for Approximating Margins of Error document (see section on “Issues 
with Approximating the Standard Error of Linear Combinations of Multiple Estimates”).69

69 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Worked Examples for Approximating Margins of Error, <www.census.gov 

/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/code-lists.html>.

56   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

56    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
 
      
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Calculating Measures of Error for User-Derived Proportions and Percentages

When data users create derived estimates for aggregated count data, they are often interested in calculating 
additional measures such as proportions and percentages. For example, the user who calculated the number of 
never-married females in the tri-county area in northern Virginia might also want to know what proportion of all 
females in this region have never been married. With proportions, the numerator is a subset of the denomina-
tor. In this case, the number of never-married females is a subset of all females. This derived proportion would 
be calculated as the number of never-married females aged 15 and older divided by the total number of females 
aged 15 and older. This proportion could also be converted to a percentage by multiplying by 100. The 2015 
ACS 1-year estimates of the total number of females aged 15 and older in Fairfax County, Arlington County, and 
Alexandria City and their respective MOEs are shown in Table 8.4.

 Table 8.4. Data for Example 3 From Three Virginia Counties/Independent Cities: 2015

Characteristic

Total females aged 15 and older living in  
 Fairfax County (Component 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Total females aged 15 and older living in  
 Arlington County (Component 2)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Total females aged 15 and older living in  
 Alexandria City (Component 3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
MOE (Subgroup 1) = ±√(743)
  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table B12001: “Sex b

2

Estimate

466,037

97,360

67,101

MOE

±391

±572

±459

+ (722)

= ±√1,073,333 = ±1,036

y Marital Status for the Population 15 Years and Over.”

2

2

2

MOE (Subgroup 2) = ±√(685)

2

+ (631)

2

= ±√867,386 = ±931

Using the data for never-married females from Example 1 in this section with the data in Table 8.4 yields the 
+ (722)
following:

MOE (Subgroup 1) = ±√(743)

= ±√1,073,333 = ±1,036
2

2

2

MOE (Subgroup 2) = ±√(685)

MOE (Subgroup 3) = ±√(1,007)
2
+ (631)
Proportion = (Never-married females / Total females)
±√2,424,674 = ±1,557
2

(203,119 / (466,037 + 97,360 + 67,101)) = (203,119 / 630,498) = 0.322

+ (647)
=
= ±√867,386 = ±931

+ (996)

2

2

2

MOE (Subgroup 3) = ±√(1,007)

+ (647)

+ (996)

=

To calculate the MOE of this proportion, we need the MOEs of the numerator (203,119) and the denominator 
(630,498). We already calculated the MOE of the number of never-married females in Example 1 in this section 
as ±5,070. Using formula (1), the MOE of the denominator is calculated as:
− [(0.322)

±√2,424,674 = ±1,557

MOE(Q̂) = 100  ∗ [

]] = 0.8%

√(5,070)

∗ (831)

2

2

2

1
630,498

MOE(Q̂) = 100  ∗ [
MOE(X̂1 + X̂2 + X̂3) = ±√(391)

1
630,498

2
√(5,070)

2
+ (572)

2
− [(0.322)

]] = 0.8%
, then the MOE of this proportion is approximated as:

= ±√690,746 = ±831

+ (459)

∗ (831)

2

2

2

If we define the proportion as 

1
MOE(X̂1 + X̂2 + X̂3) = ±√(391)
Ŷ

MOE(P̂) =

2
2
√[MOE(X̂)]
+ (572)
2

2
2
− (P̂
+ (459)
2

2 
= ±√690,746 = ±831
)

2
∗ [MOE(Ŷ)]

2
+ (722)
2
− (P̂
However, the Census Bureau provides ACS estimates as percentages rather than proportions in data.census.gov. 
+ (631)
For this example, the proportion of never-married females (0.322) can be converted to the percentage of never- 
married females (32.2%) by multiplying by 100. If we define this percentage as 

MOE (Subgroup 1) = ±√(743)
√[MOE(X̂)]
MOE (Subgroup 2) = ±√(685)

= ±√1,073,333 = ±1,036
)

= ±√867,386 = ±931

∗ [MOE(Ŷ)]

MOE(P̂) =

1
Ŷ

2 

2

2

MOE (Subgroup 3) = ±√(1,007)

. 

+ (647)

2

2

 then the 
2
=

+ (996)

(6)

Substituting the estimates for the numerator and denominator, and their respective MOEs in formula (6), and 
±√2,424,674 = ±1,557
multiplying by 100 yields:

MOE(Q̂) = 100  ∗ [

1
630,498

√(5,070)

2

− [(0.322)

2

2

∗ (831)

]] = 0.8%

MOE(X̂1 + X̂2 + X̂3) = ±√(391)

2

2

2

+ (572)
Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  57 

= ±√690,746 = ±831

+ (459)

MOE(P̂) =

1
Ŷ

2

2

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    57

2 

√[MOE(X̂)]

− (P̂

∗ [MOE(Ŷ)]

)

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users should note that if the value under the square root is negative, then substitute a “plus” for the “minus” sign 
under the square root in formula (6). This modified formula is the same as the formula for the MOE of a ratio, 
which will be discussed in the next section.

Using formula (2), the SE of the percentage estimate of never-married females is 0.80 / 1.645 = 0.488. CVs can 
also be calculated for derived percentages using formula (4) and are interpreted in the same way as for derived 
count estimates. In this example, the CV for the percentage of never-married females is (0.488 / 32.2) * 100 = 1.5 
percent, indicating that this is a very reliable estimate with a standard error that is much smaller than the esti-
mated percentage.

Calculating Measures of Error for Derived Ratios

Ratios are used to compare two estimates where the numerator is not a subset of the denominator. For example, 
the data user in Example 1 may want to compare the number of never-married males in the tri-county area to the 
number of never-married females. To do this, the user must first obtain the component estimates and MOEs for 
males, and calculate the derived estimate and MOE of the number of never-married males in the tri-county area. 
These data, from the 2015 ACS 1-year estimates, are shown in Table 8.5 below. 

  Table 8.5. Data for Example 4 From Three Virginia Counties/Independent Cities: 2015

Characteristic

Never-married males living in Fairfax County 
 (Component 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Never-married males living in Arlington County  
 (Component 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Never-married males living in Alexandria City 
 (Component 3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Estimate

156,720

44,613

25,507

  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, data.census.gov, Table B12001: “Sex by Marital Status for the Population 15 Years and Over.”

MOE

±4,222

±2,819

±2,259

Using the derived estimate and MOE calculated in Example 1 in this section, and the data from Table 8.5, the ratio 
would be calculated as:

Ratio = (Never-married males / Never-married females)

Ratio = ((156,720 + 44,613 + 25,507) / 203,119) = (226,840 / 203,119) = 1.117

This means that there were approximately 112 never-married men for every 100 never-married women living in 
the three Virginia counties in 2015.

Using formula (1), the MOE of the derived estimate of never-married males is calculated as:

A ratio has a slightly different estimator for the MOE than a proportion. If 
never-married males and 
as:

 = the number of never-married females, then the MOE of this ratio is approximated 

, where 

 = the number of 

Substituting the estimates for the numerator and denominator, and their respective MOEs in this formula yields:

(7)

58   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

58    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
Using formula (2), the SE of the ratio is 0.039 / 1.645 = 0.024. Using formula (4), the CV for the ratio of never-
married males to never-married females is (0.024 / 1.117) * 100 = 2.1 percent, indicating that this is a very reliable 
estimate with an SE that is much smaller than the value of the estimated ratio.

Calculating Measures of Error for Derived Estimates of Percent Change

One of the most important benefits of annual releases of ACS estimates is the ability it provides for data users 
to analyze change over time. A frequent application is to calculate the percent change from one time period to 
another. For example, users may want to calculate the percent change from a 2009–2013 ACS 5-year estimate to 
a 2014–2018 ACS 5-year estimate. Normally, the current estimate is compared with the older estimate. 

If the current estimate = 

 and the earlier estimate = 

, then the MOE for percent change is calculated as follows:

(8)

Formula (8) reduces to a ratio, so the ratio formula (7) described in the section above should be used to calcu-
late the MOE. As a caveat, users should be aware that this formula does not take into account the correlation 
when calculating a change between two overlapping time periods. To calculate standard errors for overlapping 
ACS multiyear estimates see the section on “Understanding Error and Determining Statistical Significance.” 

Calculating Measures of Error for the Product of Two Estimates 

In some instances, data users may need to derive an estimate by multiplying a published count by a published 
percentage. For example, a data user might be interested in the number of 1-unit detached owner-occupied 
housing units in a geographic area. In 2015, the number of owner-occupied housing units in the United States 
was 74,506,512 with an MOE of 228,238, and the percent of 1-unit detached owner-occupied housing units was 
82.4 (0.824) with an MOE of 0.1 percent (0.001).70 So, the number of 1-unit detached owner-occupied housing 
units was 74,506,512 * 0.824 = 61,393,366. The formula to calculate the MOE of a product is:

Substituting the estimates and their respective MOEs in formula (9) yields:

(9)

To obtain the lower and upper bounds of the 90 percent confidence interval around 61,393,366, add and 
subtract the MOE from 61,393,366. Thus, the 90 percent confidence interval for this estimate is [61,393,366 
– 202,289] to [61,393,366 + 202,289] or 61,191,077 to 61,595,655. Using formula (2), the SE of the product is 
202,289 / 1.645 = 122,972. Using formula (4), the coefficient of variation for this derived estimate is (122,972 / 
61,393,366) * 100 = 0.2 percent, indicating that the derived estimate is very reliable.

70 U.S. Census Bureau, ACS 1-year estimates in data.census.gov, Table S2504: “Physical Housing Characteristics for Occupied Housing Units.”

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  59 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    59

U.S. Census BureauCalculating Measures of Error Using Variance Replicate Tables

Advanced users may be interested in the Variance Replicate Tables, first released for the 2010–2014 ACS 5-year 
data in July 2016.71 These augmented ACS Detailed Tables include sets of 80 replicate estimates, which allow 
users to calculate measures of error for derived estimates using the same methods that are used to produce 
the published MOEs in data.census.gov. These methods incorporate the covariance between estimates that the 
approximation formulas in this document leave out.

The Variance Replicate Tables are available for a subset of the 5-year Detailed Tables for 11 geographic summary 
levels, including the nation, states, counties, census tracts, and block groups. These tables will be released on an 
annual basis, shortly after the release of the standard 5-year data products. 

Variance Replicate Documentation, including lists of tables and summary levels, is available on the Census 
Bureau’s Web site.72 

71 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Variance Replicate Tables, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/variance 

-tables.html>. 

72 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Variance Replicate Tables Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 

/acs/technical-documentation/variance-tables.html>.

60   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

60    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau9. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE ACS AND  
THE DECENNIAL CENSUS

While the main function of the U.S. decennial cen-
sus is to provide counts of people for the purpose of 
congressional apportionment, the primary purpose of 
the American Community Survey (ACS) is to measure 
the changing social and economic characteristics of 
the U.S. population—our education, housing, jobs, and 
more. 

Every 10 years since 1790, Congress has authorized 
the government to conduct a national census of the 
U.S. population, as required by the U.S. Constitution. 
In every decennial census from 1940 through 2000, 
two questionnaires were used to collect information: 
a “short form” with only basic questions such as age, 
sex, race, and Hispanic origin; and a “long form” with 
the basic short-form questions plus additional ques-
tions on social, economic, and housing characteristics. 
Only a subset of households received the long-form 
questionnaire—about one in every six in 2000. 

After the 2000 Census, the long form was replaced 
by the ACS, which continued to collect long-form 
type information throughout the decade. The ACS 
includes not only the basic short-form questions, but 
also detailed questions about population and housing 
characteristics. It is a nationwide, continuous survey 
designed to provide communities with reliable and 
timely social, economic, housing, and demographic 
data every year. Since its start, the ACS has been pro-
viding a continuous stream of updated information for 
states and local areas, and is revolutionizing the way 
we use statistics to understand our communities. 

There are many similarities between the ACS and 
the 2000 Census long form. Both data sources are 
based on information from samples of the population, 
and while there are some differences in the question 
wording between the ACS and the 2000 Census long 
form, many questions in the two forms are very similar. 
However, there are also important differences in resi-
dence rules, reference periods, definitions, and meth-
ods between the two data sources that can impact 
comparability between ACS and 2000 Census data. 
For detailed guidance on comparing ACS and 2000 
Census data, visit the Census Bureau’s Web page on 
Comparing ACS Data.73 

Residence Rules and Reference Periods

The fundamentally different purposes of the ACS and 
the decennial census and their timing led to important 

73 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Comparing ACS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/comparing-acs-data.html>. 

differences in the choice of data collection methods. 
The decennial census residence rules, which deter-
mine where people should be counted, are based on 
the principle of “usual residence” on April 1, in keeping 
with the focus of the census on the requirements of 
congressional apportionment and state redistricting. 
To accomplish this, the decennial census attempts to 
restrict and determine a principal place of residence 
on one specific date for everyone enumerated. 

The ACS uses a “current residence” rule to inter-
view people who are currently living or staying in 
the sample housing unit as long as their stay at that 
address will exceed 2 months (see Box 9.1 for more 
information). This method is consistent with the goal 
that the Census Bureau produce ACS estimates based 
on data collected over a period of time, rather than a 
single point in time. ACS 1-year estimates represent 
data that have been collected over a 12-month period, 
and 5-year estimates represent data collected over a 
period of 60 months.

Therefore, a key difference between the ACS and the 
decennial census is the overall time frame in which 
they are conducted. The distribution of census enu-
meration dates are highly clustered in March and 
April (when most census mail returns are received) 
with additional, smaller clusters seen in May and June 
(when nonresponse follow-up activities take place). 
This means that the data from the decennial census 
tend to describe the characteristics of the population 
and housing in the March through June time period 
(with an overrepresentation of March and April), while 
ACS data describe the characteristics nearly every day 
over the full calendar year.  

The differences in the ACS and census data as a 
consequence of the different residence rules are most 
likely minimal for most areas and most characteristics. 
However, for certain segments of the population, the 
usual and current residence concepts could result in 
different residence decisions. Appreciable differences 
may occur in areas where large proportions of the 
total population spend several months of the year in 
areas that would not be considered their residence 
under decennial census rules. In particular, data for 
areas that include large beach, lake, or mountain 
vacation areas, or large migrant worker communities 
may differ appreciably between the decennial census 
and the ACS if populations live there for more than 2 
months.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  61 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    61

U.S. Census BureauBox 9.1. Who Counts as a “Resident” in the ACS?

The ACS uses the concept of “current residence” to determine who should be considered residents of 
sample housing units. The basic idea behind this concept is that everyone who is currently living or stay-
ing at an address for more than 2 months is considered a current resident of that address.

This means that their expected length of stay is more than 2 months, not that they have been staying 
in the housing unit for more than 2 months at the time when the survey is conducted. A person away 
from their residence for 2 months or less, whether in the United States or overseas, on a vacation or on 
a business trip, is considered to be a “resident” at the address, and the unit is classified as occupied and 
eligible for inclusion in the survey. A person away from their residence for more than 2 months is consid-
ered not to be a resident. For the ACS, if no one is determined to be a current resident in the sampled 
housing unit, it is classified as “vacant.”

There are a few exceptions to the “2-month” rule:

People Without Another Place to Stay: Anyone staying at a residence who does not have 
another place to stay, even if they are at the residence for 2 months or less, are always consid-
ered current residents of the residence.

Children Away at School: Children (under college age) who are away at boarding school or 
summer camp for more than 2 months are always considered current residents of their parents’ 
homes. College students’ current residency is established by the 2-month rule.

Children in Joint Custody: Children who live under joint custody agreements and move between 
residences are always considered current residents of the sampled housing unit where they are 
staying at the time of the interview.

“Commuter Workers”: People who stay at a residence close to work and return regularly to 
another residence to be with their family are always considered current residents of the family 
residence, not the work-related residence.

Residency in group quarters facilities is determined differently. All people residing in the selected facility 
at the time of interview, regardless of the length of stay, are eligible to be selected to be interviewed in 
the ACS.

Some of the specific differences in reference periods 
between the ACS and 2000 Census are described on 
the next page. Data users should consider the poten-
tial impact of these differences when comparing ACS 
with 2000 Census estimates. 

Employment Status (Compare With 
Caution)

The reference periods are different because of year-
round ACS data collection. The ACS reference period 
is the week before the respondent completed the 
survey or the field representative conducted the 
interview. Because questionnaires are mailed and field 
interviews are conducted throughout the year, there 
is a revolving reference period. For the 2000 Census, 
the reference period was the week before Census Day 
(April 1, 2000).

Income and Earnings Data (Compare With 
Caution)

The ACS asks for a respondent’s income over the 
“past 12 months.” For example, the 2018 ACS 1-year 
data reflect incomes over 2017–2018, and the 2014–
2018 ACS 5-year data reflect incomes over 2013–2018. 
The 2000 Census, however, collected the income data 
for a fixed period of time—“during 1999” (the last 
calendar year). In a comparison study between the 
2000 Census income data and the 2000 ACS, income 
collected in the 2000 Census was found to be about 
4 percent higher than that in the 2000 ACS. For more 
information on the differences of income in the ACS 
and the 2000 Census, visit the Census Bureau’s Web 
page on Income in the American Community Survey: 
Comparison to Census 2000.74

74 U.S. Census Bureau, Income in the American Community Survey: 

Comparisons to Census 2000, <www.census.gov/library/working 
-papers/2003/acs/2003_Nelson_01.html>.

62   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

62    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauSchool Enrollment (Compare)

Occupants Per Room

The ACS reference period was 3 months preceding 
the date of interview, while the 2000 Census reference 
period was any time since February 1, 2000.

Definitions 

Many data items collected in both the ACS and the 
2000 Census long form have slightly different defini-
tions that could affect the comparability of the esti-
mates for these items. Some of the specific differences 
in subject or variable definitions between the ACS and 
the 2000 Census are described below. For a compre-
hensive list, visit the Census Bureau’s Web page on 
Subject Definitions.75

Group Quarters

The total group quarters (GQ) population in the ACS 
may not be comparable with decennial census counts 
because there are some GQ types that are out of 
scope in the ACS. These include domestic violence 
shelters, soup kitchens, regularly scheduled mobile 
food vans, targeted nonsheltered outdoor locations, 
crews on maritime vessels, and living quarters for 
victims of natural disasters. The exclusion of these 
GQ types from the ACS may result in a small bias in 
some ACS estimates to the extent that the excluded 
population is different from the included population. 
Furthermore, only a sample of GQ facilities through-
out the United States and Puerto Rico are selected for 
the ACS. The ACS controls the GQ sample at the state 
level only. Therefore, for lower levels of geography, 
particularly when there are relatively few GQs in a geo-
graphic area, the ACS estimate of the GQ population 
may vary from the count from the decennial census.

Aggregate Gross Rent

Data on gross rent in the ACS should not be com-
pared with 2000 Census gross rent data. For the 2000 
Census, tables were not released for total renter- 
occupied units. The universe in the 2000 Census 
was “specified renter-occupied housing units,” which 
excluded one-family houses on 10 acres or more, 
whereas the universe in the ACS is “renter-occupied 
housing units,” thus, comparisons cannot be made 
between these two data sets.

75 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Code 
Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/technical-documentation/code-lists.html>.

Data on occupants per room in the ACS should be 
compared with the 2000 Census with caution. This 
is due to: (1) differences in residence rules, (2) the 
absence of population controls used to adjust for 
undercoverage in the reported number of current 
residents in the ACS used in this measure, and (3) dif-
ferences in the reported number of rooms because of 
changes in the rooms question between the 2007 and 
2008 ACS.

Data Collection Modes

Until 2015, the Census Bureau sent all selected 
addresses an advance notification letter inform-
ing people living at that address that they had been 
selected to participate in the ACS. Shortly thereafter 
(for most U.S. addresses), instructions for complet-
ing the survey by Internet were mailed. Beginning 
in August 2015, the Census Bureau eliminated the 
advance notification letter and instead included 
instructions in the initial mail package for complet-
ing the survey by Internet or over the phone through 
a toll-free Telephone Questionnaire Assistance (TQA) 
line. If households do not respond by Internet or TQA, 
then a paper questionnaire is mailed to the address. 
In Puerto Rico and some hard-to-reach areas, only a 
paper questionnaire is mailed. 

Until 2017, if no response was received by Internet, 
TQA, or mail within a month following the initial mail-
ing, the Census Bureau followed up with a telephone 
interview when a telephone number was available. 
However, beginning in October 2017, the Census 
Bureau discontinued the telephone Nonresponse 
Followup operation because of declining response 
rates and increasing costs. Respondent data are still 
collected via telephone through the TQA operation.

If the Census Bureau is unable to get a response 
by Internet, mail, or TQA, then the address may be 
selected for an in-person interview. Because of the 
high cost per completed interview, the Census Bureau 
samples about one in three nonrespondent housing 
units for personal visit interviews. The proportion of 
nonresponding households selected for in-person 
interviews is higher in areas with lower predicted 
response rates. A sample of people living in group 
quarters facilities—such as college dorms, skilled 
nursing facilities, or correctional facilities—is also 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  63 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    63

U.S. Census BureauAdditional Background Information

Design and Methodology Report 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/methodology/design-and-methodology.html> 
The 2014 Design and Methodology Report contains 
descriptions of the basic design of the ACS and details 
of the full set of methods and procedures.

American Community Survey and Puerto Rico 
Community Survey Subject Definitions  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/technical-documentation/code-lists.html>  
This document provides detailed definitions of popula-
tion and housing variables in the ACS, as well as guid-
ance on making comparisons with ACS data.

Comparing ACS Data 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/comparing-acs-data.html> 
This Web page provides guidance on making com-
parisons with ACS data. It includes a link to an ACS/
Census Table Comparison Tool to match ACS 5-year 
tables with corresponding tables from the 2000 
Census.

interviewed in person to ensure coverage of people 
who are not living in housing units.

Like the ACS, the primary modes of data collection in 
the 2000 Census and the 2010 Census were mail-out/
mail-back questionnaires, telephone, and in-person 
visits. Unlike the ACS, enumerators for the decennial 
census attempted to follow up with all nonresponding 
households through telephone or personal interviews. 
Data for those who could not be contacted or who 
refused to participate were collected through “proxy” 
interviews, which means interviewers attempted to 
find and get a response from a knowledgeable respon-
dent who was not a member of the household. Neither 
the 2000 Census nor the 2010 Census included an 
Internet response option, although the Census Bureau 
is providing this option in the 2020 Census. 

Sampling and Nonsampling Error

ACS data, like the data from the 2000 Census long 
form, are derived from a sample of the population 
and are therefore subject to sampling error. The 2000 
Census sample—consisting of about one in six house-
holds nationwide—is larger than the 5-year aggregated 
ACS sample designed to replace it. Therefore, there is 
more sampling error associated with the ACS 5-year 
estimates, compared with estimates from the 2000 
Census long form. However, compared with the 2000 
Census, the ACS has lower levels of nonresponse 
error—as measured through survey response rates 
and item nonresponse rates. Visit the sections on 
“Understanding Error and Determining Statistical 
Significance” and “Measures of Nonsampling Error” for 
more information.  

64   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

64    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau10. USING DOLLAR-DENOMINATED DATA

Dollar-denominated data refer to any characteristics for which inflation adjustments are used when produc-
ing annual estimates or comparing estimates across time periods. For example, income, rent, home value, and 
energy costs across time periods are all dollar-denominated data.

Inflation will affect the comparability of dollar-denominated data across time periods. When American 
Community Survey (ACS) multiyear estimates for dollar-denominated data are generated, amounts are adjusted 
using national Consumer Price Index (CPI) annual averages, since a regional-based CPI is not available for the 
entire country.

Given the potential impact of inflation on observed differences of dollar-denominated data across time periods, 
ACS data users should adjust for the effects of inflation. Such an adjustment will provide comparable estimates 
accounting for inflation. In making adjustments, the U.S. Census Bureau recommends using factors based on the 
All-Items CPI-U-RS (CPI Research Series).76 Explanations follow.

Creating Single-Year Income Values

ACS income values are reported based on the amount of income received during the 12 months preceding the 
interview month. This is the income reference period. Since there are 12 different income reference periods 
throughout an interview year, 12 different income inflation adjustments are made. Monthly CPI-U-RSs are used to 
inflation-adjust the 12 reference period incomes to a single reference period of January through December of the 
interview year. Note that there are no inflation adjustments for 1-year estimates of rent, home value, or energy 
cost values.

Adjusting Single-Year Estimates Over Time

When comparing 1-year income, rent, home value, and energy cost value estimates from two different years, 
adjustments should be made as follows: 

1.   Obtain the All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Averages for the 2 years being compared.

2.   Calculate the inflation adjustment factor as the ratio of the CPI-U-RS from the more recent year to the  

  CPI-U-RS from the earlier year.

3.   Multiply the dollar-denominated data estimated for the earlier year by the inflation adjustment factor. You  
  can also follow this same process to calculate the corresponding margin of error of the inflation-adjusted  
  estimate.

The inflation-adjusted estimate for the earlier year can be expressed as:

where 
Annual Average for the more recent year (Y2); and 

 is the All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Average for the earlier year (Y1); 

 is the published ACS estimate for the earlier year (Y1).

(1)

 is the All Items CPI-U-RS 

The example below compares the national median value for owner-occupied mobile homes in 2014 ($38,400) 
and 2015 ($44,000). First adjust the 2014 median value using the 2014 All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Average 
(348.3) and the 2015 All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Average (348.9) as follows:

Formula 10.1:

348.9
Thus, the comparison of the national median value for owner-occupied mobile homes in 2014 and 2015, in 201
348.3
dollars, would be $38,466 (2014 inflation-adjusted to 2015 dollars) versus $44,000 (2015 dollars).

∗ $38,400 = $38,466

X�2014,Adj =

5 

Formula 10.2:

76 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index, CPI Research Series Using Current Methods (CPI-U-RS), <www.bls.gov/cpi 

/research-series/home.htm>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  65 

X�2005−2009,Adj =

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    65

∗ $40,800 = $45,085

348.3
315.2

U.S. Census BureauCreating Values Used in Multiyear Estimates

Multiyear income, rent, home value, and energy cost values are created with inflation adjustments. The Census 
Bureau uses the All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Averages for each year in the multiyear time period to calculate a 
set of inflation adjustment factors. Adjustment factors for a time period are calculated as ratios of the CPI-U-RS 
Annual Average from the most recent year to the CPI-U-RS Annual Averages from each of the earlier years. 
The ACS values for each of the earlier years in the multiyear period are multiplied by the appropriate inflation 
adjustment factors to produce the inflation-adjusted values. These values are then used to create the multiyear 
estimates.  

As an illustration, consider the time period 2014–2018, with hypothetical individual reference-year income values 
ranging from $15,000 in 2014 to $30,000 in 2018 (see Table 10.1).

 Table 10.1. Hypothetical Income Values Adjusted for Inflation: 2014–2018

Reference year

Income

CPI-U-RS annual averages

Inflation-adjusted income

2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

$30,000 

$30,000 

$25,000 

$20,000 

$15,000 

369.8

361.0

353.4

348.9

348.3

$30,000 

$30,731 

$26,160 

$21,198 

$15,926 

In this example, the multiyear income components are created from inflation-adjusted income values using the 
CPI-U-RS Annual Averages shown in the third column of the table. The inflation-adjusted 2017 value is the ratio 
of 369.8 to 361.0 applied to $30,000, which equals $30,731. The same calculation is applied to the income values 
from 2014 through 2016 to produce inflation-adjusted values for those years. These individual values are then 
used to create the multiyear estimate for the 2014–2018 time period.

Adjusting Multiyear Estimates Over Time

When comparing multiyear estimates from two different time periods, adjustments should be made as follows:

1.  Obtain the latest available All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Averages for the two periods being compared.

2.  Calculate the inflation adjustment factor as the ratio of the CPI-U-RS Annual Average in formula (1) from the 

most recent year to the CPI-U-RS in formula (1) from the earlier year.

3.  Multiply the dollar-denominated estimate for the earlier time period by the inflation adjustment factor. You 

can also follow this same process to calculate the corresponding margin of error of the inflation-adjusted 
estimate.

The inflation-adjusted estimate for the earlier year can be expressed as:   

where 

 is the All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Average for the last year in the earlier time period (P1). 

 is the All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Average for the last year in the most current time period (P2). 

is the published ACS estimate for the earlier time period (P1).

(2)

66   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

66    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
Formula 10.1:

348.9
As an illustration, consider ACS multiyear estimates for the two time periods of 2005–2009 and 2010–2014. To 
348.3
compare the median household income for owner-occupied mobile homes in 2005–2009 ($40,800) and 2010–
2014 ($39,000), first adjust the 2005–2009 median value using the 2009 All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Averages 
(315.2) and the 2014 All Items CPI-U-RS Annual Averages (348.3) as follows:

∗ $38,400 = $38,466

X�2014,Adj =

Formula 10.2:

X�2005−2009,Adj =

348.3
315.2

∗ $40,800 = $45,085

Thus, the comparison of the national median value for owner-occupied mobile homes in 2005–2009 and 2010–
2014, in 2014 dollars, would be $45,085 (2005–2009 inflation-adjusted to 2014 dollars) versus $39,000 (2010–
2014, already in 2014 dollars).

Issues Associated With Inflation Adjustment

The recommended inflation adjustment uses a national-level CPI and, thus, will not reflect inflation differences 
that may exist across different geographic areas. In addition, since the inflation adjustment uses the All Items 
CPI, it will not reflect differences that may exist across characteristics such as energy and housing costs.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  67 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    67

U.S. Census Bureau11. MEASURES OF NONSAMPLING ERROR

All survey estimates are subject to both sampling and 
nonsampling error. In the section on “Understanding 
Error and Determining Statistical Significance,” the topic 
of sampling error and the various measures available 
for understanding the uncertainty in the estimates 
due to their being based on estimates derived from a 
sample, rather than from an entire population, are dis-
cussed. The margins of error published with American 
Community Survey (ACS) estimates measure only the 
effect of sampling error. Other errors that affect the 
overall accuracy of the survey estimates may occur in 
the course of collecting and processing the ACS and are 
referred to collectively as nonsampling errors.

Broadly speaking, nonsampling error refers to any 
error affecting a survey estimate outside of sam-
pling error. Nonsampling error can occur in complete 
censuses as well as in sample surveys, and is com-
monly recognized as including coverage error, unit 
nonresponse, item nonresponse, response error, and 
processing error. The U.S. Census Bureau has many 
procedures in place designed to reduce these sources 
of nonsampling error and thus improve the quality of 
the data. More information about these procedures is 
available in the section on “Improving Data Quality by 
Reducing Nonsampling Error” on the Census Bureau’s 
Design and Methodology Report Web page.77

Types of Nonsampling Error

Nonsampling error can result in both random errors 
and systematic errors. Of greatest concern are system-
atic errors. Random errors are less critical since they 
tend to cancel out at higher geographic levels in large 
samples such as the ACS.

On the other hand, systematic errors tend to accu-
mulate over the entire sample. For example, if there 
is an error in the questionnaire design that negatively 
affects the accurate capture of respondents’ answers, 
processing errors are created. Systematic errors often 
lead to a bias in the final results. Unlike sampling error 
and random error resulting from nonsampling error, 
bias caused by systematic errors cannot be reduced 
by increasing the sample size.

Coverage error occurs when a housing unit or person 
does not have a chance of selection in the sample 
(undercoverage), or when a housing unit or person 
has more than one chance of selection in the sample 
or is included in the sample when they should not 
have been (overcoverage). For example, if the frame 
used for the ACS did not allow the selection of 

newly-constructed housing units; the estimates would 
suffer from errors because of housing undercoverage.

The final ACS estimates are adjusted for undercover-
age and overcoverage by controlling county-level 
estimates to independent total housing unit controls 
and to independent population controls by sex, age, 
race, and Hispanic origin, produced by the Census 
Bureau’s Population Estimates Program. However, it is 
important to measure the extent of coverage adjust-
ment by comparing the precontrolled ACS estimates to 
the final controlled estimates. If the extent of coverage 
adjustments is large, there is a greater chance that dif-
ferences in characteristics of undercovered or overcov-
ered housing units or individuals differ from those eligi-
ble to be selected. When this occurs, the ACS may not 
provide an accurate picture of the population before 
the coverage adjustment, and the population controls 
may not eliminate or minimize that coverage error. For 
more information about coverage error visit the Census 
Bureau’s Coverage Rates Definitions Web page.78

However, the process of controlling ACS estimates to 
the official population estimates may lead to additional 
errors in the ACS data. The population controls used in 
the ACS are midyear, point-in-time population estimates 
based on the decennial census, which has different 
residence rules than the monthly samples on which ACS 
estimates are based. See the section on “Residence 
Rules and Reference Periods” for more information.

Unit nonresponse is the failure to obtain the minimum 
required information from a housing unit or a resident 
of group quarters in order for it to be considered a 
completed interview. Unit nonresponse means that no 
survey data are available for a particular sampled unit 
or person. For example, if no one in a sampled housing 
unit is available during the time frame for data collec-
tion, unit nonresponse will result. 

It is important to measure unit nonresponse because 
it has a direct effect on the quality of the data. If the 
unit nonresponse rate is high, it increases the chance 
that the final survey estimates may contain bias, even 
though the ACS estimation methodology includes a 
nonresponse adjustment intended to control poten-
tial unit nonresponse bias. This will happen if the 
characteristics of nonresponding units differ from the 
characteristics of responding units. For more informa-
tion about unit nonresponse, visit the Census Bureau’s 
Response Rates Definitions Web page.79

78 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
overage Rate Definitions, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
C
acs/methodology/sample-size-and-data-quality/coverage-rates 
/
definitions.html>.
-

77 U.S. Census Bureau, “Chapter 15: Improving Data Coverage by 
Reducing Non-Sampling Error,” American Community Survey Design 
and Methodology Report, 2014, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/methodology/design-and-methodology.html>.

79 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS),  
R
esponse Rate Definitions, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/a
/
methodology/sample-size-and-data-quality/response-rates 
-
definitions.html>.

cs 

68   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

68    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauItem nonresponse occurs when a respondent fails 
to provide an answer to a required item or when 
the answer given is inconsistent with other informa-
tion. With item nonresponse, while some responses 
to the survey questionnaire for the unit are provided, 
responses to other questions are not obtained. For 
example, a respondent may be unwilling to respond 
to a question about income, resulting in item 
nonresponse for that question. Another reason for 
item nonresponse may be a lack of understanding of a 
particular question by a respondent.

Information on item nonresponse allows users to judge 
the completeness of the data on which the survey 
estimates are based. Final estimates can be adversely 
impacted when item nonresponse is high, because 
bias can be introduced if the actual characteristics of 
the people who do not respond to a question dif-
fer from those people who do respond to it. The ACS 
estimation methodology includes imputations for item 
nonresponse, intended to reduce the potential for item 
nonresponse bias. For more information about item 
nonresponse, visit the Census Bureau’s Item Allocation 
Rates Definitions Web page.80

Response error occurs when data are reported or 
recorded incorrectly. Response errors may be due to 
the respondent, the interviewer, the questionnaire, or 
the survey process itself. For example, if an interviewer 
conducting a telephone interview incorrectly records 
a respondent’s answer, response error results. In the 
same way, if the respondent fails to provide a correct 
response to a question, response error results. Another 
potential source of response error is a survey process 
that allows proxy responses to be obtained, wherein a 
knowledgeable person within the household provides 
responses for another person within the household 
who is unavailable for the interview. Even more error 
prone is allowing neighbors to respond.

Processing error can occur during the preparation of 
the final data files. For example, errors may occur if 
data entry of questionnaire information is incomplete 
or inaccurate. Coding of responses incorrectly also 
results in processing error. Critical reviews of edits and 
tabulations by subject matter experts are conducted to 
keep errors of this kind to a minimum. 

ACS Quality Measures

Nonsampling error is extremely difficult, if not impos-
sible, to measure directly. However, the Census Bureau 
has developed a number of indirect measures of 
nonsampling error to help inform users of the qual-
ity of the ACS estimates: sample size, coverage rates, 
unit response rates and nonresponse rates by reason, 

80 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Item 

Allocation Rates Definitions, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/methodology/sample-size-and-data-quality/item-allocation 
-rates-definitions.html>.

and item allocation rates. These measures are available 
on the Census Bureau’s Sample Size and Data Quality 
Web page.81

Sample size measures for the ACS summarize infor-
mation for the housing unit and group quarters (GQ) 
samples. The measures available at the state level are:82

•  Housing Units 

· Number of initial addresses selected. 
· Number of final survey interviews.

•  Group Quarters People (beginning with the 

2006 ACS) 
· Number of initial persons selected. 
· Number of final survey interviews.

Sample size measures may be useful in special cir-
cumstances when determining whether to use 1-year 
or 5-year estimates in conjunction with estimates of 
the population of interest. While the coefficient of 
variation (CV) can be used to determine usability, as 
explained in the section on “Understanding Error and 
Determining Statistical Significance,” there may be 
some situations where the CV is small but the user 
has reason to believe the sample size for a subgroup 
is very small and the robustness of the estimate is in 
question.

Coverage rates measure the ratio of ACS population 
or housing estimates of geographic areas or groups to 
the independent estimates for those areas or groups, 
multiplied by 100. National coverage rates are available 
for the total population by six race/ethnicity catego-
ries and the GQ population. Coverage rates are also 
available for housing units and total population by 
sex at both the state and national level. Low coverage 
rates are an indication of greater potential for cover-
age error in the estimates.   

Unit response and nonresponse rates for housing units 
are available at the county, state, and national level 
by reason for nonresponse: refusal, unable to locate, 
no one home, temporarily absent, language problem, 
insufficient data, maximum contact attempts reached, 
and other.

A low unit response rate is an indication that there is 
potential for bias in the survey estimates.  

81 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Sample Size 
and Data Quality, <www.census.gov/acs/www/methodology/sample 
-size-and-data-quality/>.

82 The sample size measures for housing units (number of initial 

addresses selected and number of final survey interviews) and for 
persons in group quarters cannot be used to calculate response rates. 
For the housing unit sample, the number of initial addresses selected 
includes addresses that were determined not to identify housing units, 
as well as initial addresses that are subsequently subsampled out in 
preparation for personal visit Nonresponse Followup. Similarly, the 
initial sample of people in group quarters represents the expected 
sample size within selected group quarters prior to visiting and sam-
pling of residents. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  69 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    69

U.S. Census BureauMissing data for a particular question or item is called 
item nonresponse. Item allocation involves the use of 
statistical procedures to impute the values for these 
missing data. Item allocation rates—the proportions of 
responses allocated for an item in a given geographic 
area—are determined by the content edits performed 
on the individual raw responses and closely corre-
spond to item nonresponse rates. Overall housing unit 
and person characteristic allocation rates are available 
at the state and national levels, which combine many 
different characteristics. Allocation rates for individual 
items are published at the state and national levels. 
Allocation rates for other summary levels may be cal-
culated from the B99 series of Detailed Tables in  
data.census.gov.

Additional Background Information

Sample Size and Data Quality 
<www.census.gov/acs/www/methodology 
/sample-size-and-data-quality/> 
The quality measures provided on this Web page illus-
trate the steps the Census Bureau takes to ensure that 
ACS data are accurate and reliable.

Design and Methodology Report 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/methodology/design-and-methodology.html> 
The 2014 Design and Methodology Report contains 
descriptions of the basic design of the ACS and details 
of the full set of methods and procedures.

Item allocation rates differ by state, so data users are 
advised to examine the allocation rates for character-
istics of interest before drawing conclusions from the 
published estimates.

70   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

70    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau12. GLOSSARY

Accuracy. One of four key dimensions of survey qual-
ity. Accuracy refers to the difference between the sur-
vey estimate and the true (unknown) value. Attributes 
are measured in terms of sources of error (for example, 
coverage, sampling, nonresponse, measurement, and 
processing).

Allocation. A commonly used approach to imputation 
(a statistical procedure to fill in missing responses) is 
known as hot-deck allocation, which uses a statistical 
method to supply responses for missing or inconsis-
tent data from responding housing units or people in 
the sample who are similar. Certain values, such as a 
person’s educational attainment, are more accurate 
when provided from another housing unit or from a 
person with similar characteristics. Allocation rates 
measure the proportion of values that required hot-
deck allocation and are an important measure of data 
quality.

American Community Survey (ACS). The ACS is a 
nationwide survey designed to provide communities a 
fresh look at how they are changing. The ACS replaced 
the decennial census long form in 2010 and thereafter 
by collecting long-form type information throughout 
the decade rather than only once every 10 years. Full 
national implementation of the ACS began in 2005. 
Questionnaires are mailed to a sample of addresses to 
obtain information about household residents and the 
housing unit itself.

The U.S. Census Bureau produces social, economic, 
housing, and demographic estimates from the ACS 
in the form of 1-year and 5-year estimates based on 
population thresholds. The strength of the ACS is in 
estimating population and housing characteristics. It 
produces estimates for small areas, including census 
tracts and block groups and population subgroups.

Although the ACS provides population and hous-
ing unit estimates, the Census Bureau’s Population 
Estimates Program produces and disseminates the 
official estimates of the population for the nation, 
states, counties, cities and towns, and estimates of 
housing units for states and counties. For 2010 and 
other decennial census years, the decennial census 
provides the official counts of population and housing 
units.

Application Programming Interface (API). API is a set 
of programs that allows an application to interact with 
other applications. The Census Bureau has developed 
the Census API, enabling developers to design Web 
and mobile apps to provide quick and easy access 
from sets of Census Bureau statistics.

Assignment. A type of imputation (a statistical proce-
dure to fill in missing responses), assignment involves 
looking at other data, as reported by the respondent, 
to fill in missing responses. For example, when deter-
mining sex, if a person reports giving birth to children 
in the past 12 months, the Census Bureau verifies that 
the person is female. This approach also uses data as 
reported by other people in the household to fill in a 
blank or inconsistent field. For example, if the refer-
ence person is a U.S. citizen, a biological child with a 
blank response to citizenship is also assumed to be a 
citizen.

Block Group. A statistical subdivision of a census tract, 
generally defined to contain between 600 and 3,000 
people and between 240 and 1,200 housing units, and 
the smallest geographic unit for which the Census 
Bureau tabulates sample data. A subdivision of a cen-
sus tract (or, before 2000, a block numbering area), 
a block group is a cluster of blocks having the same 
first digit of their four-digit identifying number within a 
census tract.

Census Geography. A collective term referring to 
the types of geographic areas used by the Census 
Bureau in its data collection and tabulation opera-
tions. This Web page shows the geographic entities for 
which data are available from the ACS, which provides 
information down to the block group level.83

With connecting lines, the diagram in the “Geographic 
Hierarchy” section shows the hierarchical relationships 
between geographic types. For example, a line extends 
from states to counties because a state is comprised 
of many counties, and a county can never cross a state 
boundary. 

If no line joins two geographic types, then an absolute 
and predictable relationship does not exist between 
them. For example, many places do not cross a county 
boundary (that is, only one county). However, some 
places extend over more than one county like New 
York City. Therefore, an absolute hierarchical relation-
ship does not exist between counties and places, and 
any tabulation involving both of these geographic 
types may represent only a part of one county or one 
place.

83 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Concept & Definitions <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/geography-acs/concepts-definitions.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  71 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    71

U.S. Census BureauCensus Tract. A small, relatively permanent statistical 
subdivision of a county delineated by a local commit-
tee of census data users for presenting data. Census 
tracts nest within counties and their boundaries 
normally follow visible features, but may follow legal 
geography boundaries and other nonvisible features 
in some instances. Census tracts ideally contain about 
4,000 people and 1,600 housing units.

Coefficient of Variation (CV). The ratio of the standard 
error (square root of the variance) to the value being 
estimated, usually expressed in terms of a percentage 
(also known as the relative standard deviation). The 
lower the CV, the higher the relative reliability of the 
estimate.

Comparison Profiles (CP). The Comparison Profiles 
show ACS data side-by-side from different data 
releases, indicating where there is a statistically sig-
nificant difference between estimates. Comparison 
Profiles are currently available for 1-year estimates 
and 5-year estimates starting with the release of the 
2011–2015 ACS 5-year data. The 5-year Comparison 
Profiles will compare data between two nonoverlap-
ping 5-year periods. ACS Comparison Profiles begin 
with the letters “CP.”

Confidence Interval. The sample estimate and its mar-
gin of error permit the construction of a confidence 
interval that represents the degree of uncertainty 
about the estimate. A 90 percent confidence interval 
can be constructed by adding and subtracting the 
published margin of error from the ACS estimate. A 90 
percent confidence interval can be interpreted roughly 
as providing 90 percent certainty that the true number 
falls between the upper and lower bounds.

Confidentiality. The guarantee made by law (Title 13, 
U.S. Code) to individuals who provide census infor-
mation regarding nondisclosure of that information 
to others. By law, the Census Bureau cannot disclose 
any private information that identifies a person or a 
business. Under federal law, the penalty for unlawful 
disclosure is a federal prison sentence of up to 5 years, 
a fine of up to $250,000, or both.

Consumer Price Index (CPI). The CPI program of the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics produces monthly data on 
changes in the prices paid by urban consumers for a 
representative basket of goods and services.

Controls. During the ACS weighting process, the offi-
cial county-level population and housing unit estimates 
are used as controls. Weights are adjusted so that ACS 
estimates conform to these controls (but do not nec-
essarily exactly match). This is done to improve person 
and housing unit coverage and to reduce the variabil-
ity of the ACS estimates.

Certain published estimates, such as total population 
estimates for states, do exactly match the controls. 
These estimates, which have five asterisks (*****) in 
the Margin of Error column in data.census.gov, are 
by definition fixed, and can be considered to have no 
sampling error.

Current Residence. The ACS uses a “current resi-
dence” concept to determine who should be consid-
ered a resident of a sample household. Everyone who 
is currently living or staying at a sample address is 
considered a resident of that address, except people 
staying there for 2 months or less. People who have 
established residence at the sample unit and are away 
for only a short period of time are also considered to 
be current residents. 

Custom Tabulations. The Census Bureau offers a wide 
variety of general purpose data products from the ACS. 
These products are designed to meet the needs of the 
majority of data users and contain predefined sets of 
data for standard census geographic areas, including 
both political and statistical geographic areas. These 
products are available through data.census.gov and the 
ACS Web site. 

For users with data needs not met through the general 
purpose products, the Census Bureau offers Custom 
Tables on a cost-reimbursable basis, through the ACS 
Custom Tabulation program.84 Custom tables are cre-
ated by tabulating data from ACS microdata files. They 
vary in size, complexity, and cost depending on the 
needs of the sponsoring client.

Data.census.gov. The Census Bureau’s primary tool 
for accessing population, housing, and economic data 
from the ACS, the Puerto Rico Community Survey, the 
decennial census, and many other Census Bureau data 
sets. Data.census.gov provides access to ACS data for 
a wide range of geographic areas, including states, cit-
ies, counties, census tracts, and block groups.

84 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Custom 

Tables, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/custom-tables 
.html>.

72   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

72    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauData Profiles (DP). Data Profiles provide summaries 
of ACS data for various social, economic, housing, and 
demographic characteristics for the United States, 
regions, divisions, states, counties, county subdivi-
sions, places, metropolitan areas, American Indian 
and Alaska Native areas, and other geographic areas. 
These profiles are similar in content to the demo-
graphic profiles from the decennial censuses. ACS 
Data Profiles begin with the letters “DP.” 

File Transfer Protocol (FTP). A process that allows a 
user to download large census and survey files and 
data sets from the Census Bureau’s Web site.85

Geographic Comparison Tables (GCT). Allow users 
to compare ACS data across geographic areas in 
the same table (e.g., all counties in a state). ACS 
Geographic Comparison Tables begin with the letters 
“GCT.”

Decennial Census. The census of population and 
housing, taken by the Census Bureau in years ending 
in 0 (zero). Article I of the Constitution requires that 
a census be taken every 10 years for the purpose of 
reapportioning the U.S. House of Representatives. Title 
13 of the U.S. Code provides the authorization for con-
ducting the census in Puerto Rico and the Island Areas.

Derived Estimates. One of the benefits of working 
with ACS data is the ability to develop unique esti-
mates called derived estimates. These derived esti-
mates are usually based on aggregating estimates 
across geographic areas or population subgroups 
for which combined estimates are not published in 
data.census.gov tables (e.g., aggregate estimates 
for a three-county area or for four age groups not 
collapsed).

Detailed Tables. Detailed Tables provide access to the 
most comprehensive ACS data tables on all topics and 
geographic areas. Tables include totals and subtotals. 
Users may choose more than one geographic area 
and more than one table that display in a scrolling list, 
but only what displays on the width of the screen will 
print.

ACS Detailed Tables begin with the letters “B” for base 
tables and “C” for collapsed tables. The “collapsed” 
tables cover the same topics as the base table, but 
with fewer categories.

Disclosure Avoidance. Statistical methods used before 
releasing data products to ensure the confidentiality of 
responses. 

Estimates. Data for the ACS are collected from a sam-
ple of housing units and used to produce estimates 
of the actual figures that would have been obtained 
by interviewing the entire population using the same 
methodology.

Five-Year Estimates. Estimates based on 5 years 
of ACS data. These estimates are meant to reflect the 
characteristics of a geographic area over the entire 
5-year period. These estimates are published for geo-
graphic areas down to the census block group level. 

Group Quarters (GQ) Facilities. A GQ facility is a place 
where people live or stay that is normally owned or 
managed by an entity or organization providing hous-
ing and/or services for the residents. These services 
may include custodial or medical care, as well as other 
types of assistance. Residency is commonly restricted 
to those receiving these services. People living in GQ 
facilities are usually not related to one another. The 
ACS collects data from people living in both housing 
units and GQ facilities.

Group Quarters (GQ) Population. Includes all people 
living in group quarters instead of housing units. Group 
quarters are places where people live or stay, in a 
group living arrangement that is owned or managed 
by an entity or organization providing housing and/or 
services for the residents. The group quarters popula-
tion lives in group quarters, of which there are two 
general categories:

Institutional group quarters are facilities that house 
those who are primarily ineligible, unable, or unlikely 
to participate in the labor force while resident. The 
institutionalized population is the population resid-
ing in institutional group quarters, such as adult cor-
rectional facilities, juvenile facilities, skilled-nursing 
facilities, and other institutional facilities such as 
mental (psychiatric) hospitals and in-patient hos-
pice facilities.

Noninstitutional group quarters are facilities that 
house those who are primarily eligible, able, or 
likely to participate in the labor force while resident. 
The noninstitutionalized population lives in nonin-
stitutional group quarters such as college/univer-
sity student housing, military quarters, and other 
noninstitutional group quarters such as emergency 
and transitional shelters for people experiencing 
homelessness and group homes.

85 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data 

via FTP (File Transfer Protocol), <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/data/data-via-ftp.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  73 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    73

U.S. Census BureauHousing Unit. A housing unit is a house, an apartment, 
a mobile home or trailer, a group of rooms, or a single 
room occupied as separate living quarters, or if vacant, 
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters. 
Separate living quarters are those in which the occu-
pants live separately from any other individuals in the 
building and which have direct access from outside 
the building or through a common hall. For vacant 
units, the criteria of separateness and direct access are 
applied to the intended occupants whenever possible.

Imputation. When data are missing, it is standard prac-
tice to use a statistical procedure called imputation to 
fill in missing responses. Imputation is the placement 
of one or more estimated answers into a field of data 
records that previously had no data or had incorrect 
or implausible data. There are two principal imputation 
methods to deal with missing or inconsistent data—
assignment and allocation.

Margin of Error (MOE). The margin of error is the 
measure of sampling error published with each ACS 
estimate. A margin of error is the difference between 
an estimate and its upper or lower confidence bounds. 
Confidence bounds can be created by adding the mar-
gin of error to the estimate (for an upper bound) and 
subtracting the margin of error from the estimate (for 
a lower bound). All published margins of error for the 
ACS are based on a 90 percent confidence level.

Measurement Error. Also referred to as “response 
error,” measurement error occurs when the response 
received differs from the “true” value as a result of 
the respondent, the interviewer, the questionnaire, the 
mode of collection, the respondent’s record-keeping 
system(s), or other similar factors.

Multiyear Estimates. Three-year and five-year esti-
mates based on multiple years of ACS data. ACS 
5-year estimates are published for geographic areas 
down to the census block group level. ACS 3-year 
estimates have been discontinued, but are available for 
2013 and earlier years for geographic areas with popu-
lations of 20,000 or more.

Narrative Profiles. Narrative profiles are short, analytic 
reports derived from recent ACS 5-year estimates. 
Each narrative profile covers 15 different topic areas 
and provides text and bar charts to display highlights 
of selected social, economic, housing, and demo-
graphic estimates for a selected geographic area.

Nonsampling Error. Total survey error can be classified 
into two categories—sampling error and nonsampling 
error. Errors that occur during data collection (for 
example, nonresponse error, response error, and inter-
viewer error) or data capture fall under the category of 
nonsampling error.

Overcoverage. Overcoverage exists when housing 
units or people have more than one chance of selec-
tion in the sample, or are included in the sample when 
they should not have been.

Period Estimates. An estimate based on information 
collected over a period of time. For ACS estimates, the 
period is either 1 year or 5 years. ACS 3-year estimates 
have been discontinued, but are available for 2013 and 
earlier years for geographic areas with populations of 
20,000 or more.

Point-in-Time Estimates. An estimate based on one 
point in time. The decennial census long-form esti-
mates for the 2000 Census were based on information 
collected as of April 1, 2000.

Population Estimates Program. The Census Bureau’s 
Population Estimates Program (PEP) produces July 1 
estimates for years after the last published decennial 
census (2010), as well as for past decades. Existing 
data series—such as births, deaths, federal tax returns, 
Medicare enrollment, and immigration—are used to 
update the decennial census base counts. Population 
estimates are used in federal funding allocations, in 
setting the levels of national surveys, and in monitoring 
recent demographic changes.

Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA). A statistical area 
defined to contain a population of 100,000 or greater 
for which the Census Bureau tabulates Public Use 
Microdata Sample (PUMS) data. ACS and decennial 
census population and housing microdata are dissemi-
nated using these defined areas.

Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) Files. 
Computerized files containing a sample of individual 
records of people and households that responded 
to the ACS (stripped of all identifying information). 
The PUMS files permit analysis of specific population 
groups and custom variables that are not available 
through other ACS data products.

Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS). The counter-
part to the ACS that is conducted in Puerto Rico.

Quality Measures. Statistics that provide informa-
tion about the quality of the data from the ACS. Four 
different measures are provided with the annual data 
release: 1) initial sample size and final interviews, 2) 
coverage rates, 3) response rates, and 4) item allo-
cation rates for all collected variables. Details are 
available in the technical documentation for the ACS 
products.

QuickFacts. A Census Bureau Web site that provides 
quick, easy access to facts about people, businesses, 
and geographic areas for all states, counties, and cities 
and towns with more than 5,000 people.

74   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

74    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauRanking Tables. A table or product type that orders 
the states according to the numeric value of the data 
displayed. ACS Ranking Tables begin with the letter 
“R.”

Reference Week. The calendar week preceding the 
date on which the respondents completed their ques-
tionnaires or were enumerated. This calendar week 
may not be the same for all people since the enumera-
tion may not be completed in 1 week.

Reference Period. Time interval to which survey 
responses refer. For example, many ACS questions 
refer to the day of the interview; others refer to “the 
past 12 months” or “last week.”

Residence Rules. The ACS uses a “current residence” 
rule to interview people who are currently living or 
staying in the sample housing unit as long as their stay 
at that address will exceed 2 months. See the entry 
on “Usual Residence” for information about residence 
rules in the decennial census.

Sampling Rate. Proportion of the addresses in a 
geographic area, or residents of a GQ facility, who are 
selected for interview in a particular time period.

Sampling Variability. Variation that occurs by chance 
because a sample of the population is surveyed rather 
than the entire population. 

Selected Population Profiles. Selected Population 
Profiles can be used to show ACS data for a specific 
racial or ethnic group (for example, Alaska Natives), 
ancestry groups, or country of birth. 

Single-Year (1-Year) Estimates. Estimates based on 
1 year of ACS data. They are meant to reflect the 
characteristics of a geographic area over an entire 
12-month period. ACS 1-year estimates are published 
for geographic areas with populations of 65,000 or 
more. Starting with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau 
is also publishing 1-year supplemental estimates—sim-
plified versions of popular ACS tables for areas with at 
least 20,000 people.

Respondent. The person supplying survey or census 
information about his or her living quarters and its 
occupants.

Standard Error. The standard error is a measure of the 
deviation of a sample estimate from the average of all 
possible samples. 

Respondent Errors. The respondents’ failure to provide 
the correct answer to a survey question for any reason, 
such as poor comprehension of the question mean-
ing, low motivation to answer the question, inability to 
retrieve the necessary information, or an unwillingness 
to answer the question truthfully.

Statistical Significance, Test of. A test of statistical 
significance provides statistical evidence that indicates 
whether an observed difference between two esti-
mates is likely due to chance (“not statistically signifi-
cant”), or likely represents a true difference that exists 
in the population as a whole (“statistically significant”).

Sample. Entities selected for a specific survey.

Sample Data. Population and housing information col-
lected on a continuous basis for selected areas in the 
ACS and other surveys where data are gathered from 
a selected group of respondents. No sample data were 
collected in the 2010 Census.

Sample Survey. A data collection activity involving 
observations or questionnaires for a sample of a popu-
lation. These data are used to produce estimates for 
the entire population.

Sampling Error. Errors that occur because only part of 
the population is directly contacted. With any sample, 
differences are likely to exist between the character-
istics of the sampled population and the larger group 
from which the sample was chosen.

Statistical significance in census data products is usu-
ally reported at the 90 percent confidence level.

Note that some statistical significance results displayed 
in data.census.gov may be based on unrounded esti-
mates and standard errors and users may not be able 
to duplicate the results using the rounded estimates 
and measures of error as displayed in data.census.gov.

Subject Tables. Subject Tables include ACS data orga-
nized by subject area, providing an overview of the 
information that analysts most often receive requests 
for from data users. ACS Subject Tables begin with the 
letter “S.” 

Summary File. The ACS Summary File is a comma-
delimited text file that contains all of the Detailed 
Tables for the ACS data releases. 

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  75 

What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know    75

U.S. Census BureauSummary Level. Summary levels specify the content 
and hierarchical relationships of the geographic ele-
ments that are required to tabulate and summarize 
data. Each summary level has an assigned 3-digit sum-
mary level code to help programmers link each specific 
summary level to its appropriate use in a table, map, or 
other data summarization format. Some examples of 
summary levels are:

•  040: State
•  050: State-County
•  060: State-County-County Subdivision
• 
• 
•  314: Metropolitan Statistical Area-Metropolitan 

150: State-County-Census Tract-Block Group
160: State-Place

Division

•  430: Urban Area-State-County

It is important to distinguish between a summary level 
and a geographic area. A summary level represents the 
concept of a geographic level. For example, summary 
level 050, State-County, represents the concept of a 
county within a state. By comparison, a geographic 
area covers territory “on the ground,” such as Madison 
County, Indiana.

Supplemental Estimates. Simplified Detailed Tables 
that provide access to the most recent ACS data at a 
lower population threshold than the standard 1-year 
tables. Available for selected geographic areas with 
20,000 people or more. ACS supplemental estimates 
begin with the letter “K.”

Undercoverage. The extent to which a sample does 
not include members of the target population thus 
preventing those members from having any chance of 
selection into the sample.

Unit Nonresponse. The failure to obtain the minimum 
required data from a unit in the sample.

Universe. The total number of units (e.g., individu-
als, households, or businesses) in the population of 
interest.

Usual Residence. Usual residence is a concept used 
in the decennial census to determine where a person 
should be counted in the census. Usual residence is 
defined as the place where a person lives and sleeps 
most of the time. This place is not necessarily the same 
as a person’s voting residence or legal residence.

Variance Replicate Tables. These augmented ACS 
Detailed Tables include sets of 80 replicate estimates, 
which allow advanced users to calculate measures 
of error for estimates using the same methods that 
are used to produce the published margins of error 
(MOEs) in data.census.gov. These methods incorporate 
the covariance between estimates that approximate 
MOE formulas do not. They are published for a subset 
of the 5-year Detailed Tables and at selected sum-
mary levels. The 2010–2014 ACS 5-year estimates were 
the first for which these were available. We started by 
selecting “Block Group,” then “Louisiana,” “Orleans 
Parish, Louisiana,” and “All Block Groups within 
Orleans Parish, Louisiana” (see Figure 6.2).

76   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 

76    What Users of Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau