American Community Survey

Information Guide

U.S. Department of Commerce
Economics and Statistics Administration
U.S. CENSUS BUREAU
census.gov

American 
Community
Survey

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Short History of the ACS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Importance of Participating in the ACS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
How the ACS Works for Your Community  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Who Uses the ACS and Why? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

Contents

How ACS Data Are Collected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
  Address Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
  Address Contacted by Mail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
  Personal Visit Follow-Up for Surveys Not Completed or Addresses With
    Post Office Box Mail Delivery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
  Personal Visit for People Living in Group Housing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
  Telephone Follow-Up for Questionnaires Returned Incomplete  . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

The U.S. Constitution, Title 13, and the ACS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

Frequently Asked Respondent Questions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
ACS Subjects and Data Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
ACS Geography  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
ACS Data Releases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Data User Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Need Help With ACS Statistics? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Contact Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
U.S. Census Bureau Regional Offices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

 
Introduction

This information guide provides an overview of the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey 
(ACS). The ACS is a nationwide survey that collects and produces information on social, economic, 
housing, and demographic characteristics about our nation's population every year. This information 
provides an important tool for communities to use to see how they are changing. When people fill out 
the ACS form, they are helping to ensure that decisions about the future of their community can be made 
using the best data available. Decision-makers require a clear picture of their population so that scarce 
resources can be allocated efficiently and effectively. 

Every year, the Census Bureau contacts over 3.5 million households across the country to participate in 
the ACS. To help those responding to the ACS, this information guide contains information on the survey 
aspects that affect the American public the most: ACS collection procedures, questions asked in the ACS, 
uses and importance of each question, and tools to access ACS estimates. 

Short History of the ACS

Every 10 years since 1790, Congress has authorized the government to conduct a national census of the 
U.S. population, as required by the U.S. Constitution. James Madison ensured that the Constitution gave 
Congress the authority to collect additional information beyond the population count in order to “enable 
[future legislators] to adapt the public measures to the particular circumstances of the community.”1 In 
the twentieth century, the questions were divided between a “short” and “long” form. Only a subset of the 
population was required to answer the long-form questions.

The most recent census consisted of a short form, which included basic questions about age, sex, race, 
Hispanic origin, household relationship, and owner/renter status. After the 2000 Census, the long form 
became the ACS, and this survey continues to collect long-form-type information each year. The ACS 
includes not only the basic short-form questions, but also detailed questions about population and 
housing characteristics. It is a nationwide, continuous survey designed to provide communities with 
reliable and timely social, economic, housing, and demographic data every year. Since its start, the 
ACS has been providing a continuous stream of updated information for states and local areas, and has 
revolutionized the way we use statistics to understand our communities.

1 Summary of debate on Census Bill, House of Representatives, 25–26 Jan., 2 Feb. 1790. (The Founders' Constitution, 1987, University of Chicago, 

Volume 2, Article 1, Section 2, Clause 3, Document 19).

census.gov/acs  1

Importance of  
Participating in the ACS

the private sector. ACS estimates are 
often used to help establish priorities 
through a needs assessment, to develop 
general plans, research, education, and 
advocacy work. 

Given competing demands and limited 
resources, it is more important than ever 
that communities base their governance 
decisions on an accurate portrait of 
the current nation. ACS estimates can 
be analyzed to prioritize proposed 
initiatives and to reassess existing 
programs. Local governments also 
receive requests for help and assistance 
from a variety of community groups 
and civic organizations that need to 
be assessed—ACS estimates are an 
extremely useful tool for evaluating 
these requests.

Most people probably never think 
about how local planners know where 
to target new development, or where 
businesses get the data they need to 
plan for expansion. Most probably do 
not think about where policymakers get 
the objective information they need to 
make sure programs are on track, or that 
local services are keeping pace with their 
community’s changing demographics. It 
may not be at the top of our minds for 
most of us, but it becomes an important 
consideration when someone receives 
the ACS in the mail. 

Each completed survey is important 
because it is a building block used to 
create statistics about communities in 
America. The information, collected from 
all over the United States by the ACS and 
throughout Puerto Rico by the Puerto 
Rico Community Survey (PRCS), serve 
as an impartial measuring stick that 
is used as the basis for decisions that 
affect nearly every aspect of our lives. 
People who receive the ACS have the 
responsibility of responding so that the 
statistical portrait of their community is 
as complete and accurate as possible. 
Every ACS survey is an opportunity for 
a respondent to help affect what their 
community receives.

An individual's responses are combined 
with others' responses to create and 
publish statistics for communities 
nationwide, which can then be used by 
community and local governments and 

2  census.gov/acs

How the ACS Works for Your Community
How the American Community Survey 
Works for Your Community

About 1 in 38 U.S. households per year receives an invitation 
to participate in the American Community Survey (ACS).

I

N
O
T
C
E
L
L
O
C

SCHOOL

RESPONDENT

INTERNET

Those who do not 
complete the survey 
may receive a 
personal visit from 
Census Bureau staff.

MAIL

U.S. CENSUS 
BUREAU

ONLINE

PAPER

YOUR COMMUNITY

Individuals can complete the questionnaire for 
their household either online or on a paper form.

I

I

N
O
T
A
N
M
E
S
S
I
D
&
G
N
I
S
S
E
C
O
R
P

census.gov

QuickFacts

DATA 
COMBINED 
INTO 
STATISTICS

Personal 
information 
removed
and kept 
confidential 

CENSUS BUREAU WEB SITE

REPORTS, TABLES, AND  APPLICATIONS 

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU

The Census Bureau publishes statistics as reports, tables, and other products 
through its Web site.

S
N
O
I
S
I
C
E
D
N
E
V
R
D
-
A
T
A
D

I

Government agencies use these statistics to 
help with decision-making and to allocate over 
$675 billion each year back to your community.

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 
AGENCIES, STATES, TRIBAL
AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES

$675 BILLION 
PER YEAR

and

SCHOOLS

ROADS

H

H

Jobs

HOSPITALS

SCHOOL

Civic and academic institutions, and businesses 
use the ACS for a variety of purposes.

YOUR COMMUNITY

The ACS is an official Census Bureau survey that is part of the decennial census 
program. It is sent to a small percentage of U.S. households monthly.

www.census.gov/acs

The ACS is an official Census Bureau survey that is 
part of the decennial Census Program. It is sent to a 
small percentage of U.S. households monthly.

census.gov/acs  3

 
 
 
Who Uses the ACS and Why? 

Federal Agencies: 
Throughout the federal government, agencies use ACS estimates to 
inform public policymakers, distribute funds, and assess programs. For 
example, the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Department of Labor, 
and the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission use  
ACS estimates to enforce employment antidiscrimination laws. The  
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs uses ACS estimates to evaluate the 
need for health care, education, and employment programs for those  
who have served in the military; and the U.S. Department of Education 
uses ACS estimates to develop adult education and literacy programs.

State and Local Agencies: 
Information from the ACS is critical to state and local agencies. Planners 
and policymakers use the up-to-date estimates to evaluate the need 
for new roads, hospitals, schools, senior services, and other basic 
services. In addition, ACS data provide local communities with important 
information about their citizens, such as educational attainment, work 
commuting patterns, and languages spoken.

Nongovernmental Organizations: 
ACS estimates are available to the public and are routinely used by 
researchers, nonprofit organizations, and community groups. These 
groups produce reports, research papers, business plans, case studies, 
datasets, and software packages. Some of these activities are designed to 
inform the public, some are designed to further business ventures, and 
some are used to apply for funding in the form of grants and donations 
for community projects.

Emergency Planners: 
Emergency planners use ACS estimates to find local statistics critical to 
emergency planning, preparedness, and recovery efforts. When severe 
weather threatens or a natural disaster has occurred, ACS estimates 
provide important characteristics about the displaced population such as 
size, age, disability status, and the characteristics of housing that may be 
damaged or destroyed.

American Indians and Alaska Natives: 
ACS estimates are available for tribal planners and administrators, as 
well as national organizations serving American Indians and Alaska 
Natives, to use in planning for future economic development, housing 
needs, and access to health and educational services. In combination 
with information from tribal administrative records, ACS estimates 
complete the portrait of the community and provide an enhanced view of 
a community’s current and future needs.

4  census.gov/acs

Businesses: 
Businesses use ACS estimates to inform important strategic decision-
making. ACS statistics can be used as a component of market research. 
They can provide information about concentrations of potential 
employees with a specific education or occupation, communities that 
could be good places to build offices or facilities, and information about 
people that might need their products or services. For example, someone 
scouting a new location for an assisted-living center might look for an 
area with a large proportion of seniors and a large proportion of people 
employed in nursing occupations. 

Educators: 
ACS estimates are available for educators to teach concepts and skills, 
such as statistical literacy, social studies, geography, and mathematics. 
Because the ACS is updated annually, it provides timely information for 
students every year. 

Journalists: 
Journalists use ACS estimates to highlight and investigate the issues that 
are important to each community. Articles frequently appear, across the 
country, on topics such as commuting and transportation, unemployment 
and earnings, education, and homeownership. Additionally, the wealth of 
ACS statistics allows journalists to paint a portrait of small communities as 
they respond to changes in population, employment, and housing needs. 

Public: 
People use ACS estimates to answer questions they have about their own 
community and other communities. If a person wants to see how they 
compare with their neighbors or find a new place to live, they can look 
to the ACS to provide a wealth of information. The ACS provides useful 
statistics about the median income of an area, the median age of the 
residents, the median house value, and monthly household expenses. 
The ACS is a good source of information on commute to work times and 
types of transportation used by the community. These statistics, and 
many more, are available to the public for communities across the  
United States.

census.gov/acs  5

 
Address selected

First month:
Mail survey 
instructions for 
online or paper 
response

Second month:
Select addresses 
for nonresponse 
follow-up personal 
visits

Third month:
Visit nonresponse 
addresses for 
personal interview

How ACS Data Are Collected

Address Selection

One important fact to remember about the ACS is that the forms are not 
mailed to specific people, but rather to specific addresses. The sample 
is designed to ensure good geographic coverage and does not target 
individuals. By focusing on quality geographic coverage, the ACS can 
produce a good picture of the community’s people and housing by surveying 
a representative sample of the population.

The Census Bureau selects a random sample of addresses to be included in 
the ACS. Each address has about a 1-in-480 chance of being selected in a 
month, and no address should be selected more than once every 5 years. 
The Census Bureau mails questionnaires to approximately 295,000 addresses 
a month across the United States. This is a small number of households 
considering there are more than 140 million eligible addresses in the United 
States, and an address that receives ACS instructions will not likely find a 
neighbor or friend who has also received them. 

Case Complete

Address Contacted by Mail

The Census Bureau mails letters to inform people living at an address that they 
have been selected to participate in the ACS and to provide instructions for 
completing the survey online. In Puerto Rico and some hard to reach areas in 
the United States, only a paper questionnaire is mailed. Households are asked to 
complete the survey online or to mail the completed paper questionnaire back 
to the Census Bureau’s National Processing Center in Jeffersonville, Indiana. If 
the Census Bureau does not receive a completed survey within a few weeks, it 
will mail an additional paper survey questionnaire.  

6  census.gov/acs

ACSPersonal Visit Follow-Up for Surveys Not Completed 
or Addresses With Post Office Box Mail Delivery

Following all mail contacts, a sample is taken from the addresses that 
have not responded online, by mail, or for those addresses with post 
office box mail delivery. These addresses are visited by Census Bureau 
field representatives, who will conduct the interview in person.

Personal Visit for People Living in Group Housing

A sample of people living in group quarters facilities, such as college 
dormitories, nursing homes, and prisons, are also interviewed in 
person to ensure coverage of everyone in the country.

Telephone Follow-Up for Questionnaires Returned 
Incomplete

After the returned questionnaires are delivered to the Census Bureau's 
National Processing Center or via the Internet, they are reviewed for 
completeness. Questionnaires needing clarification are referred to the 
Census Bureau's telephone call centers for telephone follow-up.

Most U.S. addresses 
selected for the ACS 
may receive in the 
mail:

structions to 
omplete the ACS 

R In
c
online

R 
R 

A reminder card

A replacement ACS 
paper packet (if the 
questionnaire is not 
completed online 
within 2 weeks of 
mailing)

R 

A second reminder 
card (if a survey 
is not completed 
within 4 weeks of 
initial mailing)
R A third reminder is 
sent to households 
that do not respond 
prior to personal 
visit follow-up

census.gov/acs  7

The U.S. Constitution, 
Title 13, and the ACS

Conducting the ACS is covered by the constitution. The U.S. Constitution 
states that “[An] Enumeration shall be made within three Years after the first 
Meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent 
Term of ten Years, in such Manner as they shall by Law direct.” Pursuant to 
this constitutional directive, Congress passed separate laws for each decennial 
census and specified the information to be collected. In 1954, Congress 
codified earlier census acts and all other statutes authorizing the decennial 
census as Title 13, U.S. Code. From the very first census act, Congress sought 
the collection of more information than just a headcount. 

The current legal authority for collecting this information resides in Title 13 of 
the U.S. Code or the “Census Act.” The Census Act provides the Census Bureau 
with legal authority to conduct the decennial census and delegates broad 
discretionary authority to the Secretary of Commerce for determining the 
manner of conducting the census. This authority has been redelegated by the 
Secretary to the Director of the Census Bureau. 

Courts routinely have upheld the constitutionality of collecting census data, 
characterizing as unquestionable the power of Congress to require both an 
enumeration and the collection of statistics in the census. The courts have held 
that the Constitution, including the fourth and fifth amendments, does not 
prohibit the gathering of other statistics in addition to the enumeration  
every 10 years.

8  census.gov/acs

Title 13, U.S. Code, 
§141(a). “The Secretary 
shall, in the year 
1980 and every 10 
years thereafter, take 
a decennial census of 
population as of the 
first day of April of such 
year, which date shall be 
known as the “decennial 
census date,” in such 
form and content as he 
may determine, including 
the use of sampling 
procedures and special 
surveys. In connection 
with any such census, the 
Secretary is authorized to 
obtain such other census 
information as necessary.”

Title 13, U.S. Code, 
§193. “In advance of, 
in conjunction with, or 
after the taking of each 
census provided for by 
this chapter, the Secretary 
may make surveys and 
collect such preliminary 
and supplementary 
statistics related to the 
main topic of the census 
as are necessary to the 
initiation, taking, or 
completion thereof.”

FAQs

Frequently Asked Respondent Questions

Do I have to respond to the ACS?

Yes. Responding to the ACS is about helping federal, tribal, 
state, and local officials make informed decisions with timely 
and accurate data. Just as people are required to respond to 
jury duty, get a drivers license in order to drive, pay their 
taxes, and report their income, they also have the obligation 
to respond to decennial census surveys.

Someone came to my home to interview me for the 
ACS. Is this legitimate?

If someone has contacted you about the ACS and you would 
like to verify that the visit or phone call you received was 
legitimate, you may call your regional census office. You can 
find contact information for your office at  
<census.gov/regions/>.

Why was my address selected for the ACS?

Addresses selected for the ACS come from the Census 
Bureau’s official inventory of known living quarters and 
selected nonresidential units in the United States and Puerto 
Rico. Each scientifically selected address represents other 
households in the surrounding community. 

Interviewing a small sample of addresses, rather than all 
addresses in the United States, allows the Census Bureau to 
measure the whole population while limiting the cost of the 
survey and reducing the overall impact on respondents. 

What if I do not know the exact answer to an ACS 
question?

On the ACS, if no one in your household knows the answer to 
a question, and the information cannot be referenced in a bill 
or other document, please give your best estimate.

I am concerned about identity theft. How does the 
Census Bureau protect my ACS information?

We understand your concerns about privacy and identity theft 
and want to assure you that we respect your privacy and will 
ensure that only authorized persons with a work-related need-
to-know view your personal information.  Title 13, United 
States Code (U.S.C.) prohibits the Census Bureau from giving 
or selling your personal information to anyone, including 
companies, other federal agencies, and law enforcement. 
When we process the information on the ACS questionnaires, 
individuals’ names and other personal identifiers are deleted 
from the files used to tabulate the information. 

Additionally, we employ statistical methodologies to ensure 
that the statistics we release do not identify individuals 
or businesses. These methods include extensive review 
and analysis of all our data products, as well as disclosure 
avoidance methodologies (such as data suppression and 
modification) to screen out information that might identify a 
specific individual or business. 

Doesn't the government already have the information 
requested on the ACS?

The Census Bureau does use statistics from other government 
agencies for research and evaluations to improve our surveys 
and censuses and better understand the information we are 
collecting. We also use such information to help develop 
estimates of the population between census years. However, 
we have not yet used information from other agencies in 
place of actual responses to the ACS for several reasons:

•  Only a few of the items on the ACS could be obtained 

from other agencies.

•  These data do not contain information for everyone, so 
we may still have to ask some people for all items.

•  The ACS was designed to provide up-to-date information. 
The information available from other agencies is not 
usually as current as the information that we collect.

The Census Bureau is conducting research exploring the 
use of information from other agencies in surveys and 
censuses, with the goal of incorporating them into our data 
gathering and analysis efforts. This will lower the burden 
on respondents by reducing the amount of information we 
request from them.

Why does the ACS ask for my name and telephone 
number?

We ask for a person’s name for two reasons. First, we have 
found over many years of research that it is easier for 
a respondent to make sure everybody in the household 
is included and to keep track of which person they are 
reporting for if the names are used. If a respondent is 
interrupted while completing the survey, it will be easier 
to resume reporting if they know which person they are 
working on— particularly in larger households. Second, 
having a name and phone number allows us to call if the 
questionnaire needs clarification.

census.gov/acs  9

ACS Subjects and Data Products

Population

Housing

Key ACS Data Products

Age 

Ancestry 

Citizenship Status

Acreage and 
  Agricultural Sales 
Bedrooms 

Data Profiles 
Provide broad social, economic, housing, and  
demographic profiles.

Commuting (Journey to Work) and 

Computer and Internet Use

   Place of Work

Disability Status

Educational Attainment and  
  School Enrollment 

Employment Status

Fertility

Grandparents as Caregivers 
Health Insurance Coverage 
Hispanic or Latino Origin 

Income and Earnings

Industry, Occupation, and  

  Class of Worker 
Language Spoken at Home 
Marital History, Marital Status 

Food Stamps/Supplemental   

   Nutrition Assistance 

   Program (SNAP)

House Heating Fuel 

Kitchen Facilities 

Occupancy/Vacancy Status

Occupants Per Room 

Plumbing Facilities

Rent 

Rooms

Selected Monthly Owner  

   Costs

Telephone Service 

  Available 

Migration/Residence 1 Year Ago 

Tenure (Owner/Renter) 

Units in Structure 

Value of Home

Vehicles Available 

Year Householder Moved  

Into Unit 

Year Structure Built

Period of Military Service 

Place of Birth 

Poverty Status 

Race 

Relationship to Householder 

Sex 

Undergraduate Field of Degree 

VA Service-Connected Disability

    Status

Veteran Status 

Work Status Last Year

Year of Entry

10  census.gov/acs

Comparison Profiles 
Similar to Data Profiles but show data side-by-side 
from the five most recent years of the ACS.

Selected Population Profiles 
Provide broad social, economic, housing, and 
demographic profiles for a large number of race, 
ethnic, ancestry, and country/region of birth groups.

Ranking Tables 
Provide state rankings of estimates across 86  
key variables.

Subject Tables 
Similar to Data Profiles but include more detailed  
ACS data, classified by subject.

Detailed Tables 
Provide access to the most detailed ACS data and 
cross tabulations of ACS variables.

Geographic Comparison Tables 
Compare geographic areas other than states (e.g., 
counties or congressional districts) for key variables.

Summary Files 
Provide access to the Detailed Tables through a 
series of comma-delimited text files.

Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) Files 
Provide access to ACS microdata for data users with 
statistical software experience.

 
ACS Subjects and Data Products

ACS Geography

Geography plays an important role in Census Bureau activities, including 
supporting the American Community Survey. The ACS is unique in its 
ability to produce estimates on a wide range of geographies, including low 
geographic levels such as census tracts and block groups. Geographic areas 
are organized in a geographic hierarchy. Larger units, like states, include 
smaller units, like counties and census tracts. Block groups are the smallest 
building block for the ACS.

Hierarchy of Select Geographic Entities 
in the American Community Survey

  American Indian Areas/
 Alaska Native Areas/
Hawaiian Home Lands

 Urban Areas
 Metropolitan and
Micropolitan Areas

  Places
  Public Use Microdata Areas
 Alaska Native Regional Areas
State Legislative Districts*

ZIP Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTA)**

         School Districts
Congressional Districts

County Subdivisions

Nation

Regions

Divisions

States

Counties

Census Tracts*

Block Groups*

Notes:
* 5-year estimates only
** 5-year estimates only, first release in 2012 for the 2007–2011 5-year estimates
This graphic does not represent the full set of entities for which the ACS publishes data.

This geographic hierarchy influences how the Census Bureau identifies geographic areas. 
A system of geocodes - numeric or alphanumeric codes - are used to represent specific 
geographic areas.

Geography Tools 

TIGER/Line 
Shapefiles: Most 
comprehensive dataset 
designed for use 
with GIS (Geographic 
Information Systems) 

TIGER/Line 
with Selected 
Demographic and 
Economic Data: 
Shapefiles prejoined 
with ACS data in 
geodatabase format 

TIGERweb:  
Web-based system 
that allows users to 
visualize TIGER data 

For more information 
on census geography, 
please visit  
<census.gov 
/geography.html> or  
<census.gov 
/programs-surveys 
/acs/geography-acs 
.html>.

census.gov/acs  11

 
 
ACS Data Releases

ACS data are very timely because they are released in the year immediately 
following the year in which they are collected. 

The ACS creates period estimates, which means they represent the 
characteristics of the population and housing over a specific data collection 
period. These are the 1-year and 5-year estimates.

1-Year Estimates

•  12 months of collected data

•  Data for areas with populations of 65,000+

•  2005 ACS 1-year estimates first released in 2006

1-Year Supplemental Estimates

•  12 months of collected data

•  Simplified versions of popular ACS tables

•  Data for areas with populations of 20,000+

•  2014 ACS 1-year supplemental estimates first released in 2016

5-Year Estimates

•  60 months of collected data

•  Data for all areas

•  2005–2009 ACS 5-year estimates first released in 2010

For more information about the release schedule, new and notable items 
related to each release, and changes to tables and geographies, please visit 
<census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/news/data-releases.html>.

Note: ACS 3-year estimates have been discontinued. Previous ACS 3-year 
estimates will remain available to data users, but no new 3-year estimates 
will be produced.

Which Estimate to Use?

1-Year Estimates

•  Reflect most current data

•  Larger margins of error 
than 5-year estimates

•  Useful for geographic 
areas with rapidly-
changing characteristics

5-Year Estimates

•  Less current as larger 
samples include data 
collected in earlier years

•  Smaller margins of error 
than 1-year estimates

• 

Increased statistical 
reliability for smaller 
geographic areas and 
small population groups

For more guidance on using 
ACS data, please visit 
<census.gov 
 /programs-surveys 
/acs/guidance.html>

12  census.gov/acs

Data User Resources

Handbooks

You can use ACS estimates in different ways and for different reasons. Each one 
of our downloadable PDF handbooks helps a particular group with specific how-
to instructions and case studies. There are ten different handbooks available 
with updated versions starting in 2017. Access the handbooks at <census.gov 
/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks.html>.

Available handbooks include: 

•  General Data Users 

•  Business

•  American Indians and Alaska Natives

•  Rural Areas

•  Researchers

•  Media 

•  Federal Agencies 

•  State and Local Government 

Special modules include:

•  Congress

•  Puerto Rico  

Community Survey

•  American FactFinder                                                                        

•  Public Use Microdata  

•  Application Programming Interface (API) 

•  Geographic Products/Applications 

Sample (PUMS) 

•  Summary Files  

Presentations

Training presentations are available online for you to learn more about 
various aspects of the ACS. Each presentation consists of PowerPoint slides, 
accompanying speaker notes, and a Webinar transcript. The presentations cover 
a variety of content levels ranging from beginning to advanced ACS data topics. 
Access the full list of presentations at <census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/guidance/training-presentations.html>.

Data Tools

Find out more about your community using free data tools from the Census 
Bureau! Popular tools include QuickFacts, American FactFinder, and the 
Application Programming Interface (API). View the complete list at <census.gov 
/acs/www/data/data-tables-and-tools/>.

census.gov/acs  13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Need Help With ACS Statistics?

Ask Census 
<ask.census.gov>

Select "American Community Survey" on the left hand menu to view questions and answers on the ACS. 
You can also send a message with your question to a Census Bureau support representative.

Customer Service

Call the Census Bureau's Customer Services Center at 301-763-INFO (4636) or 1-800-923-8282 from  
9 a.m.–5 p.m. EST, Monday through Friday.

Data Dissemination Specialists

Our regional data staff can help you access local statistics from the ACS or offer training to help build your 
skills. Contact them at 1-844-ASK-DATA (1-844-275-3282) or <census.askdata@census.gov>.

ACS Web site 
<census.gov/acs>

The ACS Web site provides a wealth of up-to-date information about the ACS program, data collection, and 
research. 

ACS Data Users Group (DUG) and Online Community 
<acsdatacommunity.prb.org>

The purpose of the ACS Data Users Group is to improve understanding of the value and utility of ACS 
data and to promote information sharing among data users about key ACS data issues and applications. 
Membership is free and open to all interested ACS data users. 

The Population Reference Bureau (PRB), in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau, maintains an online 
community, organizes webinars and special sessions at professional meetings, and holds ACS Data Users 
Conferences.

14  census.gov/acs

Need Help With ACS Statistics?

Contact Information

U.S. Census Bureau 
Regional Offices

For assistance completing the 
survey: 
Please call 1-800-354-7271.

Telephone Device for the Deaf 
(TDD): 
TTY users can dial 1-800-877-8339 to use the 
Federal Relay Service.

Did the Census Bureau call me? 
Census Bureau calls originate from one of three 
contact centers: 
Hagerstown, MD: 1-800-392-6975 
Jeffersonville, IN: 1-800-523-3205 
Tucson, AZ: 1-800-642-0469

Did the Census Bureau visit me? 
Please contact your regional office to verify 
a visit from a Census Bureau employee. View 
contact information to the right.

Necesita ayuda? 
Llame 1-877-833-5625.

News Media 
Please call 301-763-3030.

Sign up for e-mail updates at: 
<public.govdelivery.com/accounts/USCENSUS 
/subscriber/new>.

New York

Los Angeles

Denver

Chicago

Philadelphia

Atlanta

Toll-Free Phone Numbers

ATLANTA <census.gov/about/regions 
/atlanta.html>  
Alabama, Georgia, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi,  
North Carolina, South Carolina 
1-800-424-6974

CHICAGO <census.gov/about/regions 
/chicago.html> 
Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, 
Missouri, Wisconsin 
1-800-865-6384

DENVER <census.gov/about/regions 
/denver.html> 
Arizona, Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, New Mexico, 
North Dakota, Montana, Oklahoma, South Dakota, 
Texas, Utah, Wyoming 
1-800-852-6159

LOS ANGELES <census.gov/about/regions 
/los-angeles.html> 
Alaska, California, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, 
Washington  
1-800-992-3530

NEW YORK <census.gov/about/regions 
/new-york.html> 
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, 
New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, 
Vermont  
1-800-991-2520

PHILADELPHIA <census.gov/about/regions 
/philadelphia.html> 
Delaware District of Columbia, Kentucky, Maryland, 
Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, West Virginia 
1-800-262-4236

census.gov/acs  15

 
 
 
 
Issued October 2017 
ACS–331(C)(2017)

