12. GLOSSARY

Accuracy. One of four key dimensions of survey qual-
ity. Accuracy refers to the difference between the sur-
vey estimate and the true (unknown) value. Attributes 
are measured in terms of sources of error (for example, 
coverage, sampling, nonresponse, measurement, and 
processing).

Allocation. A commonly used approach to imputation 
(a statistical procedure to fill in missing responses) is 
known as hot-deck allocation, which uses a statistical 
method to supply responses for missing or inconsis-
tent data from responding housing units or people in 
the sample who are similar. Certain values, such as a 
person’s educational attainment, are more accurate 
when provided from another housing unit or from a 
person with similar characteristics. Allocation rates 
measure the proportion of values that required hot-
deck allocation and are an important measure of data 
quality.

American Community Survey (ACS). The ACS is a 
nationwide survey designed to provide communities a 
fresh look at how they are changing. The ACS replaced 
the decennial census long form in 2010 and thereafter 
by collecting long-form type information throughout 
the decade rather than only once every 10 years. Full 
national implementation of the ACS began in 2005. 
Questionnaires are mailed to a sample of addresses to 
obtain information about household residents and the 
housing unit itself.

The U.S. Census Bureau produces social, economic, 
housing, and demographic estimates from the ACS 
in the form of 1-year and 5-year estimates based on 
population thresholds. The strength of the ACS is in 
estimating population and housing characteristics. It 
produces estimates for small areas, including census 
tracts and block groups and population subgroups.

Although the ACS provides population and hous-
ing unit estimates, the Census Bureau’s Population 
Estimates Program produces and disseminates the 
official estimates of the population for the nation, 
states, counties, cities and towns, and estimates of 
housing units for states and counties. For 2010 and 
other decennial census years, the decennial census 
provides the official counts of population and housing 
units.

Application Programming Interface (API). API is a set 
of programs that allows an application to interact with 
other applications. The Census Bureau has developed 
the Census API, enabling developers to design Web 
and mobile apps to provide quick and easy access 
from sets of Census Bureau statistics.

Assignment. A type of imputation (a statistical proce-
dure to fill in missing responses), assignment involves 
looking at other data, as reported by the respondent, 
to fill in missing responses. For example, when deter-
mining sex, if a person reports giving birth to children 
in the past 12 months, the Census Bureau verifies that 
the person is female. This approach also uses data as 
reported by other people in the household to fill in a 
blank or inconsistent field. For example, if the refer-
ence person is a U.S. citizen, a biological child with a 
blank response to citizenship is also assumed to be a 
citizen.

Block Group. A statistical subdivision of a census tract, 
generally defined to contain between 600 and 3,000 
people and between 240 and 1,200 housing units, and 
the smallest geographic unit for which the Census 
Bureau tabulates sample data. A subdivision of a cen-
sus tract (or, before 2000, a block numbering area), 
a block group is a cluster of blocks having the same 
first digit of their four-digit identifying number within a 
census tract.

Census Geography. A collective term referring to 
the types of geographic areas used by the Census 
Bureau in its data collection and tabulation opera-
tions. This Web page shows the geographic entities for 
which data are available from the ACS, which provides 
information down to the block group level.79

With connecting lines, the diagram in the “Geographic 
Hierarchy” section shows the hierarchical relationships 
between geographic types. For example, a line extends 
from states to counties because a state is comprised 
of many counties, and a county can never cross a state 
boundary. 

If no line joins two geographic types, then an absolute 
and predictable relationship does not exist between 
them. For example, many places do not cross a county 
boundary (that is, only one county). However, some 
places extend over more than one county like New 
York City. Therefore, an absolute hierarchical relation-
ship does not exist between counties and places, and 
any tabulation involving both of these geographic 
types may represent only a part of one county or one 
place.

Census Tract. A small, relatively permanent statistical 
subdivision of a county delineated by a local commit-
tee of census data users for presenting data. Census 
tracts nest within counties and their boundaries 
normally follow visible features, but may follow legal 
geography boundaries and other nonvisible features 

79 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Concept & Definitions <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/geography-acs/concepts-definitions.html>.

78   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
78   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureauin some instances. Census tracts ideally contain about 
4,000 people and 1,600 housing units.

Coefficient of Variation (CV). The ratio of the standard 
error (square root of the variance) to the value being 
estimated, usually expressed in terms of a percentage 
(also known as the relative standard deviation). The 
lower the CV, the higher the relative reliability of the 
estimate.

Current Residence. The ACS uses a “current resi-
dence” concept to determine who should be consid-
ered a resident of a sample household. Everyone who 
is currently living or staying at a sample address is 
considered a resident of that address, except people 
staying there for 2 months or less. People who have 
established residence at the sample unit and are away 
for only a short period of time are also considered to 
be current residents. 

Comparison Profiles (CP). The Comparison Profiles 
show ACS data side-by-side from different data 
releases, indicating where there is a statistically sig-
nificant difference between estimates. Comparison 
Profiles are currently available for 1-year estimates 
and 5-year estimates starting with the release of the 
2011–2015 ACS 5-year data. The 5-year Comparison 
Profiles will compare data between two nonoverlap-
ping 5-year periods. ACS Comparison Profiles begin 
with the letters “CP.”

Confidence Interval. The sample estimate and its mar-
gin of error permit the construction of a confidence 
interval that represents the degree of uncertainty 
about the estimate. A 90 percent confidence interval 
can be constructed by adding and subtracting the 
published margin of error from the ACS estimate. A 90 
percent confidence interval can be interpreted roughly 
as providing 90 percent certainty that the true number 
falls between the upper and lower bounds.

Confidentiality. The guarantee made by law (Title 13, 
U.S. Code) to individuals who provide census infor-
mation regarding nondisclosure of that information 
to others. By law, the Census Bureau cannot disclose 
any private information that identifies a person or a 
business. Under federal law, the penalty for unlawful 
disclosure is a federal prison sentence of up to 5 years, 
a fine of up to $250,000, or both.

Consumer Price Index (CPI). The CPI program of the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics produces monthly data on 
changes in the prices paid by urban consumers for a 
representative basket of goods and services.

Custom Tabulations. The Census Bureau offers a wide 
variety of general purpose data products from the ACS. 
These products are designed to meet the needs of the 
majority of data users and contain predefined sets of 
data for standard census geographic areas, including 
both political and statistical geographic areas. These 
products are available through data.census.gov and the 
ACS Web site. 

For users with data needs not met through the general 
purpose products, the Census Bureau offers Custom 
Tables on a cost-reimbursable basis, through the ACS 
Custom Tabulation program.80 Custom tables are cre-
ated by tabulating data from ACS microdata files. They 
vary in size, complexity, and cost depending on the 
needs of the sponsoring client.

Data.census.gov. The Census Bureau’s primary tool 
for accessing population, housing, and economic data 
from the ACS, the Puerto Rico Community Survey, the 
decennial census, and many other Census Bureau data 
sets. Data.census.gov provides access to ACS data for 
a wide range of geographic areas, including states, cit-
ies, counties, census tracts, and block groups.

Data Profiles (DP). Data Profiles provide summaries 
of ACS data for various social, economic, housing, and 
demographic characteristics for the United States, 
regions, divisions, states, counties, county subdivi-
sions, places, metropolitan areas, American Indian 
and Alaska Native areas, and other geographic areas. 
These profiles are similar in content to the demo-
graphic profiles from the decennial censuses. ACS 
Data Profiles begin with the letters “DP.” 

Controls. During the ACS weighting process, the offi-
cial county-level population and housing unit estimates 
are used as controls. Weights are adjusted so that ACS 
estimates conform to these controls (but do not nec-
essarily exactly match). This is done to improve person 
and housing unit coverage and to reduce the variabil-
ity of the ACS estimates.

Decennial Census. The census of population and 
housing, taken by the Census Bureau in years ending 
in 0 (zero). Article I of the Constitution requires that 
a census be taken every 10 years for the purpose of 
reapportioning the U.S. House of Representatives. Title 
13 of the U.S. Code provides the authorization for con-
ducting the census in Puerto Rico and the Island Areas.

Certain published estimates, such as total population 
estimates for states, do exactly match the controls. 
These estimates, which have five asterisks (*****) in 
the Margin of Error column in data.census.gov, are 
by definition fixed, and can be considered to have no 
sampling error.

Derived Estimates. One of the benefits of working 
with ACS data is the ability to develop unique esti-
mates called derived estimates. These derived esti-
mates are usually based on aggregating estimates 

80 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Custom 

Tables, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/custom-tables 
.html>.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  79 
What All Data Users Need to Know  79

U.S. Census Bureauacross geographic areas or population subgroups 
for which combined estimates are not published in 
data.census.gov tables (e.g., aggregate estimates 
for a three-county area or for four age groups not 
collapsed).

Detailed Tables. Detailed Tables provide access to the 
most comprehensive ACS data tables on all topics and 
geographic areas. Tables include totals and subtotals. 
Users may choose more than one geographic area and 
more than one table that display in a scrolling list, but 
only what displays on the width of the screen will print.

ACS Detailed Tables begin with the letters “B” for base 
tables and “C” for collapsed tables. The “collapsed” 
tables cover the same topics as the base table, but 
with fewer categories.

Disclosure Avoidance. Statistical methods used before 
releasing data products to ensure the confidentiality of 
responses. 

Estimates. Data for the ACS are collected from a 
sample of housing units and used to produce estimates 
of the actual figures that would have been obtained 
by interviewing the entire population using the same 
methodology.

Five-Year Estimates. Estimates based on 5 years 
of ACS data. These estimates are meant to reflect the 
characteristics of a geographic area over the entire 
5-year period. These estimates are published for geo-
graphic areas down to the census block group level. 

File Transfer Protocol (FTP). A process that allows a 
user to download large census and survey files and 
data sets from the Census Bureau’s Web site.81

Geographic Comparison Tables (GCT). Allow users 
to compare ACS data across geographic areas in 
the same table (e.g., all counties in a state). ACS 
Geographic Comparison Tables begin with the letters 
“GCT.”

Group Quarters (GQ) Facilities. A GQ facility is a place 
where people live or stay that is normally owned or 
managed by an entity or organization providing hous-
ing and/or services for the residents. These services 
may include custodial or medical care, as well as other 
types of assistance. Residency is commonly restricted 
to those receiving these services. People living in GQ 
facilities are usually not related to one another. The 
ACS collects data from people living in both housing 
units and GQ facilities.

81 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Data via 

FTP (File Transfer Protocol), <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/data/data-via-ftp.html>.

Group Quarters (GQ) Population. Includes all people 
living in group quarters instead of housing units. Group 
quarters are places where people live or stay, in a 
group living arrangement that is owned or managed by 
an entity or organization providing housing and/or ser-
vices for the residents. The group quarters population 
lives in group quarters, of which there are two general 
categories:

Institutional group quarters are facilities that house 
those who are primarily ineligible, unable, or unlikely 
to participate in the labor force while resident. The 
institutionalized population is the population resid-
ing in institutional group quarters, such as adult cor-
rectional facilities, juvenile facilities, skilled-nursing 
facilities, and other institutional facilities such as 
mental (psychiatric) hospitals and in-patient hospice 
facilities.

Noninstitutional group quarters are facilities that 
house those who are primarily eligible, able, or likely 
to participate in the labor force while resident. The 
noninstitutionalized population lives in noninsti-
tutional group quarters such as college/university 
student housing, military quarters, and other non-
institutional group quarters such as emergency 
and transitional shelters for people experiencing 
homelessness and group homes.

Housing Unit. A housing unit is a house, an apartment, 
a mobile home or trailer, a group of rooms, or a single 
room occupied as separate living quarters, or if vacant, 
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters. 
Separate living quarters are those in which the occu-
pants live separately from any other individuals in the 
building and which have direct access from outside 
the building or through a common hall. For vacant 
units, the criteria of separateness and direct access are 
applied to the intended occupants whenever possible.

Imputation. When data are missing, it is standard prac-
tice to use a statistical procedure called imputation to 
fill in missing responses. Imputation is the placement 
of one or more estimated answers into a field of data 
records that previously had no data or had incorrect 
or implausible data. There are two principal imputation 
methods to deal with missing or inconsistent data—
assignment and allocation.

Margin of Error (MOE). The margin of error is the 
measure of sampling error published with each ACS 
estimate. A margin of error is the difference between 
an estimate and its upper or lower confidence bounds. 
Confidence bounds can be created by adding the mar-
gin of error to the estimate (for an upper bound) and 
subtracting the margin of error from the estimate (for 
a lower bound). All published margins of error for the 
ACS are based on a 90 percent confidence level.

80   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
80   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauMeasurement Error. Also referred to as “response 
error,” measurement error occurs when the response 
received differs from the “true” value as a result of 
the respondent, the interviewer, the questionnaire, the 
mode of collection, the respondent’s record-keeping 
system(s), or other similar factors.

Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA). A statistical area 
defined to contain a population of 100,000 or greater 
for which the Census Bureau tabulates Public Use 
Microdata Sample (PUMS) data. ACS and decennial 
census population and housing microdata are dissemi-
nated using these defined areas.

Multiyear Estimates. Three-year and five-year esti-
mates based on multiple years of ACS data. ACS 
5-year estimates are published for geographic areas 
down to the census block group level. ACS 3-year 
estimates have been discontinued, but are available for 
2013 and earlier years for geographic areas with popu-
lations of 20,000 or more.

Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) Files. 
Computerized files containing a sample of individual 
records of people and households that responded 
to the ACS (stripped of all identifying information). 
The PUMS files permit analysis of specific population 
groups and custom variables that are not available 
through other ACS data products.

Narrative Profiles. Narrative profiles are short, analytic 
reports derived from recent ACS 5-year estimates. 
Each narrative profile covers 15 different topic areas 
and provides text and bar charts to display highlights 
of selected social, economic, housing, and demo-
graphic estimates for a selected geographic area.

Nonsampling Error. Total survey error can be classified 
into two categories—sampling error and nonsampling 
error. Errors that occur during data collection (for 
example, nonresponse error, response error, and inter-
viewer error) or data capture fall under the category of 
nonsampling error.

Overcoverage. Overcoverage exists when housing 
units or people have more than one chance of selec-
tion in the sample, or are included in the sample when 
they should not have been.

Period Estimates. An estimate based on information 
collected over a period of time. For ACS estimates, the 
period is either 1 year or 5 years. ACS 3-year estimates 
have been discontinued, but are available for 2013 and 
earlier years for geographic areas with populations of 
20,000 or more.

Point-in-Time Estimates. An estimate based on one 
point in time. The decennial census long-form esti-
mates for the 2000 Census were based on information 
collected as of April 1, 2000.

Population Estimates Program. The Census Bureau’s 
Population Estimates Program (PEP) produces July 1 
estimates for years after the last published decennial 
census (2010), as well as for past decades. Existing 
data series—such as births, deaths, federal tax returns, 
Medicare enrollment, and immigration—are used to 
update the decennial census base counts. Population 
estimates are used in federal funding allocations, in 
setting the levels of national surveys, and in monitoring 
recent demographic changes.

Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS). The counter-
part to the ACS that is conducted in Puerto Rico.

Quality Measures. Statistics that provide informa-
tion about the quality of the data from the ACS. Four 
different measures are provided with the annual data 
release: 1) initial sample size and final interviews, 2) 
coverage rates, 3) response rates, and 4) item allo-
cation rates for all collected variables. Details are 
available in the technical documentation for the ACS 
products.

QuickFacts. A Census Bureau Web site that provides 
quick, easy access to facts about people, businesses, 
and geographic areas for all states, counties, and cities 
and towns with more than 5,000 people.

Ranking Tables. A table or product type that orders 
the states according to the numeric value of the data 
displayed. ACS Ranking Tables begin with the letter “R.”

Reference Week. The calendar week preceding the 
date on which the respondents completed their ques-
tionnaires or were enumerated. This calendar week 
may not be the same for all people since the enumera-
tion may not be completed in 1 week.

Reference Period. Time interval to which survey 
responses refer. For example, many ACS questions 
refer to the day of the interview; others refer to “the 
past 12 months” or “last week.”

Residence Rules. The ACS uses a “current residence” 
rule to interview people who are currently living or 
staying in the sample housing unit as long as their stay 
at that address will exceed 2 months. See the entry 
on “Usual Residence” for information about residence 
rules in the decennial census.

Respondent. The person supplying survey or census 
information about his or her living quarters and its 
occupants.

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  81 
What All Data Users Need to Know  81

U.S. Census BureauRespondent Errors. The respondents’ failure to provide 
the correct answer to a survey question for any reason, 
such as poor comprehension of the question mean-
ing, low motivation to answer the question, inability to 
retrieve the necessary information, or an unwillingness 
to answer the question truthfully.

Sample. Entities selected for a specific survey.

Statistical significance in census data products is usu-
ally reported at the 90 percent confidence level.

Note that some statistical significance results displayed 
in data.census.gov may be based on unrounded esti-
mates and standard errors and users may not be able 
to duplicate the results using the rounded estimates 
and measures of error as displayed in data.census.gov.

Sample Data. Population and housing information col-
lected on a continuous basis for selected areas in the 
ACS and other surveys where data are gathered from 
a selected group of respondents. No sample data were 
collected in the 2010 Census.

Subject Tables. Subject Tables include ACS data orga-
nized by subject area, providing an overview of the 
information that analysts most often receive requests 
for from data users. ACS Subject Tables begin with the 
letter “S.” 

Sample Survey. A data collection activity involving 
observations or questionnaires for a sample of a popu-
lation. These data are used to produce estimates for 
the entire population.

Sampling Error. Errors that occur because only part of 
the population is directly contacted. With any sample, 
differences are likely to exist between the character-
istics of the sampled population and the larger group 
from which the sample was chosen.

Sampling Rate. Proportion of the addresses in a 
geographic area, or residents of a GQ facility, who are 
selected for interview in a particular time period.

Sampling Variability. Variation that occurs by chance 
because a sample of the population is surveyed rather 
than the entire population. 

Selected Population Profiles. Selected Population 
Profiles can be used to show ACS data for a specific 
racial or ethnic group (for example, Alaska Natives), 
ancestry groups, or country of birth. 

Single-Year (1-Year) Estimates. Estimates based on 1 
year of ACS data. They are meant to reflect the charac-
teristics of a geographic area over an entire 12-month 
period. ACS 1-year estimates are published for geo-
graphic areas with populations of 65,000 or more. 
Starting with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is also 
publishing 1-year Supplemental Estimates—simplified 
versions of popular ACS tables for areas with at least 
20,000 people.

Standard Error. The standard error is a measure of the 
deviation of a sample estimate from the average of all 
possible samples. 

Statistical Significance, Test of. A test of statistical 
significance provides statistical evidence that indicates 
whether an observed difference between two esti-
mates is likely due to chance (“not statistically signifi-
cant”), or likely represents a true difference that exists 
in the population as a whole (“statistically significant”).

Summary File. The ACS Summary File is a comma-
delimited text file that contains all of the Detailed 
Tables for the ACS data releases. 

Summary Level. Summary levels specify the content 
and hierarchical relationships of the geographic ele-
ments that are required to tabulate and summarize 
data. Each summary level has an assigned 3-digit sum-
mary level code to help programmers link each specific 
summary level to its appropriate use in a table, map, or 
other data summarization format. Some examples of 
summary levels are:

•  040: State
•  050: State-County
•  060: State-County-County Subdivision
• 
• 
•  314: Metropolitan Statistical Area-Metropolitan 

150: State-County-Census Tract-Block Group
160: State-Place

Division

•  430: Urban Area-State-County

It is important to distinguish between a summary level 
and a geographic area. A summary level represents the 
concept of a geographic level. For example, summary 
level 050, State-County, represents the concept of a 
county within a state. By comparison, a geographic 
area covers territory “on the ground,” such as Madison 
County, Indiana.

Supplemental Estimates. Simplified Detailed Tables 
that provide access to the most recent ACS data at a 
lower population threshold than the standard 1-year 
tables. Available for selected geographic areas with 
20,000 people or more. ACS Supplemental Estimates 
begin with the letter “K.”

Undercoverage. The extent to which a sample does 
not include members of the target population thus 
preventing those members from having any chance of 
selection into the sample.

Unit Nonresponse. The failure to obtain the minimum 
required data from a unit in the sample.

82   Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data 
82   What All Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauUniverse. The total number of units (e.g., individu-
als, households, or businesses) in the population of 
interest.

Usual Residence. Usual residence is a concept used 
in the decennial census to determine where a person 
should be counted in the census. Usual residence is 
defined as the place where a person lives and sleeps 
most of the time. This place is not necessarily the same 
as a person’s voting residence or legal residence.

Variance Replicate Tables. These augmented ACS 
Detailed Tables include sets of 80 replicate estimates, 
which allow advanced users to calculate measures 
of error for estimates using the same methods that 
are used to produce the published margins of error 
(MOEs) in data.census.gov. These methods incorporate 
the covariance between estimates that approximate 
MOE formulas do not. They are published for a subset 
of the 5-year Detailed Tables and at selected summary 
levels. The 2010–2014 ACS 5-year estimates were the 
first for which these were available. We started by 
selecting “Block Group,” then “Louisiana,” “Orleans 
Parish, Louisiana,” and “All Block Groups within 
Orleans Parish, Louisiana” (see Figure 6.2).

Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data  83 
What All Data Users Need to Know  83

U.S. Census Bureau