An ofﬁcial website of the United States government Here’s how you know

(cid:0)

   BACK TO TOPICS PAGE [/ACS/WWW/ABOUT/WHY-WE-ASK-EACH-QUES…

We ask for the name of each person in the household for two

reasons. First, we have found over many years of research that

it is easier for a respondent to keep track of which person they

are answering for if the names are used. If you are interrupted

while completing the survey, it will be easier to resume if you

know which person you were working on, particularly in larger
households.

The second reason is administrative. In some instances,

responses are difﬁcult to interpret, or missing critical

information. If we have the name and telephone number of the

person who completed the survey, we can call to collect

missing information or ask for clariﬁcation. By having the name

of each household member, we can more easily refer to

speciﬁc information.

Without the name and phone number, we would have to send a ﬁeld representative to gather the information

in person, which is more expensive than a phone call.

Your privacy concerns

We use your conﬁdential survey answers to create statistics like those in the results below and in the full tables that
contain all the data—no one is able to ﬁgure out your survey answers from the statistics we produce. The Census

Bureau is legally bound to strict conﬁdentiality requirements. Individual records are not shared with anyone, including
federal agencies and law enforcement entities. By law, the Census Bureau cannot share respondents' answers with
anyone, including companies, other federal agencies, and law enforcement.

Question as it appears on the form

We ask one question about the name of each person to help with the administration of the data
collection.

(cid:0)

   VIEW QUESTION

Results from this question

Contact information is not part of published estimates and is carefully protected, as required by federal law, to respect
the personal information of respondents.

History of the name question

The name question originated with the 1790 Census. It was added to the ACS in 2005 when it replaced the decennial census lon
form.

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

[https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

