An ofﬁcial website of the United States government Here’s how you know

(cid:0)

   BACK TO TOPICS PAGE [/ACS/WWW/ABOUT/WHY-WE-ASK-EACH-QUES…

We ask about the acreage associated with houses and mobile

homes, in addition to agricultural sales, to create statistics

about agricultural areas and to better understand home value

statistics.

Federal agencies use the data to plan government programs

designed to beneﬁt the farm population and to identify

agricultural areas in order to properly distribute funding.

Your privacy concerns

We use your conﬁdential survey answers to create statistics like those in the results below and in the full tables that contain all th

data—no one is able to ﬁgure out your survey answers from the statistics we produce. The Census Bureau is legally bound to

strict conﬁdentiality requirements. Individual records are not shared with anyone, including federal agencies and law enforcemen

entities. By law, the Census Bureau cannot share respondents' answers with anyone, including companies, other federal agenci

and law enforcement.

Questions as they appear on the form

We ask two questions about acreage and agricultural sales to help federal agencies estimate the

(cid:0)

   VIEW QUESTIONS

farm population.

Results from these questions

We do not publish data tables based on these topics, but the results are used in formulas to estimate the
farm population.

Acreage and agricultural sales data help communities:

Provide Equitable Housing Assistance

We ask about acreage and agricultural sales to help federal agencies fairly distribute funds from assistance
programs. Communities may use the information to determine if they are eligible to receive funds based on
its farm population and plan outreach strategies to inform eligible residents. The data also help ensure that

housing assistance programs are reaching their intended populations. For example, the historical deﬁnition
of Fair Market Rents, used to allocate housing assistance, has always excluded housing units on more than
10 acres because these housing units might already be beneﬁtting from farm subsidies and have lower-
than-market rents.

Support Agricultural Programs

We ask about which areas of a community are agricultural to help communities ensure eligible institutions
receive funding for agricultural education and research. This funding is distributed based on a formula that
uses ACS data.

Plan Community Development

Knowing the size and agricultural nature of areas of each community can help communities:

Understand changes in local housing markets.
Identify opportunities to improve tax, assistance, and zoning policies.
Reduce tax revenue losses from vacant or abandoned properties.

History of acreage and agricultural sales questions

Acreage and agricultural sales questions originated with the 1960 Census. They were transferred to the ACS in 2005 when it
replaced the decennial census long form.

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

[https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/]

Is this page helpful?

✕

 Yes 

 No

