Understanding and Using the American Community 
Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files
What Data Users Need to Know

Issued February 2021

Acknowledgments

Linda A. Jacobsen, Vice President, U.S. Programs, Population Reference 
Bureau (PRB), and Mark Mather, Associate Vice President, U.S. Programs, 
PRB, drafted this handbook in partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey Office. Other PRB staff who assisted in 
drafting and reviewing the handbook include: Jean D’Amico, Lillian Kilduff, 
Kelvin Pollard, Paola Scommegna, and Alicia VanOrman. Some of the 
material in this handbook was adapted from the Census Bureau’s 2009 
publication, A Compass for Understanding and Using American Community 
Survey Data: What PUMS Data Users Need to Know, drafted by Leonard M. 
Gaines.

Nicole Scanniello, Gretchen Gooding, and Amanda Klimek, Census Bureau, 
contributed to the planning and review of this handbook.  

The American Community Survey program is under the direction of  
Albert E. Fontenot Jr., Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs, 
Deborah M. Stempowski, Assistant Director for Decennial Census 
Programs, and Donna M. Daily, Chief, American Community Survey Office.

Other individuals from the Census Bureau who contributed to the review and 
release of these handbooks include Lydia Anderson, Aaron Basler, Sirius 
Fuller, William Hazard, KaNin Reese, Camille Ryan, Janice Valdisera, Tyson 
Weister, and Kai Wu.

Faye E. Brock, Linda Chen, and Christine E. Geter provided publication 
management, graphic design and composition, and editorial review for the 
print and electronic media under the direction of Corey Beasley, Acting 
Chief of the Graphic and Editorial Services Branch, Public Information Office.

Understanding and Using the American 
Community Survey Public Use Microdata 
Sample Files
What Data Users Need to Know

Issued February 2021

U.S. Department of Commerce 
Wynn Coggins, 
Acting Agency Head

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Dr. Ron Jarmin, 
Acting Director

Suggested Citation

  U.S. Census Bureau,  
Understanding and Using the 
American Community Survey Public 
Use Microdata Sample Files: What 
Data Users Need to Know,  
U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC, 2021.

U.S. CENSUS BUREAU 
Dr. Ron Jarmin, 
Acting Director

Dr. Ron Jarmin, 
Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer

Albert E. Fontenot Jr., 
Associate Director for Decennial Census Programs

Deborah M. Stempowski, 
Assistant Director for Decennial Census Programs

Donna M. Daily, 
Chief, American Community Survey Office

Contents

1. ACS PUMS Files: The Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

2. Public Use Microdata Areas  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

3. Accessing ACS PUMS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

4. Preparing ACS PUMS Data Files for Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

5. Data Quality in the ACS PUMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

6. Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

Appendix: Linking Household Members Together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   iii 
What Data Users Need to Know    iii

U.S. Census Bureau 
This page is intentionally blank.

UNDERSTANDING AND USING THE AMERICAN 
COMMUNITY SURVEY PUBLIC USE MICRODATA 
SAMPLE FILES: WHAT DATA USERS NEED TO 
KNOW

The U.S. Census Bureau produces a large number 
of data profiles, tables, maps, and other products 
based on American Community Survey (ACS) 
data. Even this abundance of pretabulated esti-
mates and data products cannot meet the needs 
of every data user. The Census Bureau’s ACS 
Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) files enable 
data users to create custom estimates and tables, 
free of charge, that are not available through 
pretabulated ACS data products.

This guide provides an overview of the ACS 
PUMS files and how they can be used to access 
data about America’s communities.

What Is the ACS?

The ACS is a nationwide survey designed to pro-
vide communities with reliable and timely social, 
economic, housing, and demographic data every 
year. A separate annual survey, called the Puerto 
Rico Community Survey (PRCS), collects similar 
data about the population and housing units in 
Puerto Rico. The Census Bureau uses data col-
lected in the ACS and the PRCS to provide esti-
mates on a broad range of population, housing 
unit, and household characteristics for states, 
counties, cities, school districts, congressional 
districts, census tracts, block groups, and many 
other geographic areas.

pooled across a calendar year to produce esti-
mates for that year. As a result, ACS estimates 
reflect data that have been collected over a 
period of time rather than for a single point in 
time as in the decennial census, which is con-
ducted every 10 years and provides population 
counts as of April 1 of the census year.

ACS 1-year estimates are data that have been col-
lected over a 12-month period and are available 
for geographic areas with at least 65,000 people. 
Starting with the 2014 ACS, the Census Bureau is 
also producing “1-year Supplemental Estimates”—
simplified versions of popular ACS tables—for 
geographic areas with at least 20,000 people. 
The Census Bureau combines 5 consecutive years 
of ACS data to produce multiyear estimates for 
geographic areas with fewer than 65,000 resi-
dents. These 5-year estimates represent data col-
lected over a period of 60 months. 

For more detailed information about the ACS—
how to judge the accuracy of ACS estimates, 
understanding multiyear estimates, knowing 
which geographic areas are covered in the ACS, 
and how to access ACS data on the Census 
Bureau’s Web site—see the Census Bureau’s 
handbook on Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users 
Need to Know.1

The ACS has an annual sample size of about 3.5 
million addresses, with survey information col-
lected nearly every day of the year. Data are 

1 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 

Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   1 
What Data Users Need to Know    1

U.S. Census Bureau1. ACS PUMS FILES: THE BASICS

The American Community Survey (ACS) microdata 
consist of individual records with information about 
the characteristics of each person and housing unit 
in the survey. The ACS Public Use Microdata Sample 
(PUMS) includes a subsample of the ACS microdata, 
devoid of personalized information. The PUMS repre-
sents about two-thirds of the responses collected in 
the ACS in a specific 1-year or 5-year period. 

The U.S. Census Bureau produces ACS 1-year and 
5-year PUMS files and typically releases these files 1 
month after the release of the published ACS tables. 
The 5-year PUMS file is a combination of five 1-year 
PUMS files. The 1-year PUMS file includes records for 
about 1 percent of the total population and the 5-year 
file includes records for about 5 percent of the total 
population. 

TIP: While PUMS data allow for more detailed and com-
plex research techniques, the files are more difficult to 
work with than published tables. Data users need to use 
statistical software, such as SPSS, SAS, R, or Stata, to 
process PUMS data, and the responsibility for produc-
ing estimates from PUMS and judging their statistical 
significance is up to the data user.

There are two types of PUMS files, one for persons and 
one for housing units. The person-level file includes 
records for people, including those who live in group 
quarter facilities such as nursing homes or college 
dorms. The housing-level files include records pertain-
ing to housing units, including vacant units.  

The ACS PUMS is a weighted sample, and weighting 
variables must be used to generate estimates and stan-
dard errors that represent the population. The PUMS 
files include both population weights and household 
weights. Population weights should be used to gener-
ate statistics about individuals, and household weights 
should be used to generate statistics about housing 
units. (See the section on “Preparing ACS PUMS Data 
Files for Analysis” for more information.) 

Protecting Confidentiality in the ACS 
PUMS

Title 13 legally requires the Census Bureau to keep all 
personal information strictly confidential.2 Examples of 
measures taken to protect confidentiality in the PUMS 
include:

•  Using only a subset of the full ACS sample to cre-

ate the PUMS. 

•  Excluding names, addresses, and any information 

that could be used to identify a specific housing 
unit, group quarters unit, or person. 

• 

“Swapping” (or exchanging) a small number of 
records with similar records from neighboring 
areas.

•  Top-coding or bottom-coding answers to selected 
variables. Top-coding and bottom-coding involves 
truncating extreme values for certain variables. 
A list of top-coded and bottom-coded val-
ues is available on the Census Bureau’s PUMS 
Documentation Web page.3 

•  Limiting the geographic areas that can be identi-

fied in the PUMS. Data are available for the nation, 
regions, divisions, states, and Public Use Microdata 
Areas (PUMAs). The section on “Public Use 
Microdata Areas” provides more information.

TIP: Due to confidentiality protections and the fact that 
PUMS files are based on only about two-thirds of the 
ACS sample, estimates using the ACS PUMS may differ 
from estimates provided through the ACS Summary File 
or other published Census Bureau tables and profiles. 
You  can  verify  that  you  have  correctly  accessed  and 
tabulated  data  from  the  ACS  PUMS  file  by  replicat-
ing the values presented in “PUMS Estimates for User 
Verification” in the PUMS Technical Documentation.⁴

2 U.S. Census Bureau, Data Protection and Privacy, Title 13 - 

Protection of Confidential Information, <www.census.gov/about 
/policies/privacy/data_stewardship/title_13_-_protection_of 
_confidential_information.html>. 

3 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

⁴ U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

2   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
2   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
 
Summary Data Versus Microdata

Summary data (also called aggregate or pretabulated 
data) are predefined weighted tabulations of person or 
housing characteristics. ACS summary tabulations are 
typically presented in tables, data profiles, and maps. 
Figure 1.1 provides a portion of a summary table on the 
means of transportation to work using the ACS 5-year 
estimates. In 2012–2016, 24,183 workers in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, got to work by bus or trolley.

subdivisions of counties that typically have between 
1,200 and 8,000 residents) and block groups (subdi-
visions of census tracts that typically have between 
600 and 3,000 residents). Summary data in published 
tables are user-friendly because they are produced by 
Census Bureau analysts, informed by data user input, 
and usually include margins of error. A drawback to 
summary data is that the user is bound to a predeter-
mined set of tabulations with fixed variable categories.

The basic unit of analysis for summary data is a spe-
cific geographic entity such as a state, county, or place 
(including cities and towns). Estimates in summary 
tables can be added (or subtracted), but users are 
constrained by the categories that are available. 

The benefit of using summary data is that estimates of 
population and housing characteristics are provided 
for geographic areas as small as census tracts (small 

By contrast, the PUMS contains individual responses 
to the full range of topics on the ACS (without indi-
vidually identifiable information). Table 1.1 provides an 
example of ACS 5-year PUMS microdata for a person 
in the state of Pennsylvania. The 2012–2016 ACS 5-year 
PUMS Data Dictionary provides information about 
each of the values in the table.5 

5 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

Figure 1.1. Published Summary Data for Means of Transportation to Work in Pittsburgh, PA:  
                2012–2016

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, <https://data.census.gov>, Table B08301: Means of Transportation to Work.

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   3 
What Data Users Need to Know    3

U.S. Census BureauTable 1.1. Example of Microdata

RT

SERIALNO

SPORDER

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

2016000009344

2016000009344

2016000009578

2016000009578

2016000009578

2016000009578

2016000021254

2016000024874

2016000025941

2016000025941

2016000025941

02

03

02

03

04

05

02

02

02

03

04

ST

42

42

42

42

42

42

42

42

42

42

42

AGEP

JWTR

SEX

49

15

27

28

29

25

25

72

22

14

71

.

.

01

01

01

01

10

.

02

.

.

2

2

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

1

2

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2012–2016 American Community Survey Estimates, 5-Year Public Use Microdata Sample File.

In the highlighted row in Table 1.1:

•  The variable for Record Type (RT) is “P,” indicating 
that this record comes from the PUMS person file. 

•  The SERIALNO (“2016000025941”) is a unique 

identifier for the housing unit.

•  SPORDER (“02”) is a unique identifier of persons 

within a housing unit. 

•  ST is “42,” indicating the individual lives in 

Pennsylvania.  

•  AGEP is “22,” indicating the person was 22 years 

old at the time of the survey.

• 

JWTR, or Means of Transportation to Work, is “02” 
indicating the person commutes to work by bus or 
trolley. 

•  SEX is “2” indicating the person is female.

You can find values for all PUMS variables in the PUMS 
Data Dictionary.6 Here, missing values are shown as 
periods. A missing numeric value or a blank charac-
ter value may be displayed differently depending on 
the software used. A missing value indicates that the 
person recode was not in the universe for the relevant 
variable. For example, as shown in the data dictionary, 
JWTR values are not available for respondents who are 
not workers. 

6 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

There are approximately 250 person-level variables 
and 200 housing-level variables available in the ACS 
PUMS. The PUMS files permit data users to analyze 
specific population groups and create custom vari-
ables that are not available through published tables. 
PUMS files allow more flexibility because data users 
can focus in on small population groups as well as 
investigate the relationship among survey question-
naire items by defining and creating unique combina-
tions of person or household variables. Some examples 
include:

•  Estimating the population living below a specified 
income-to-poverty ratio (for example, children 
living in families with income below 185 percent of 
the poverty threshold).

• 

Investigating the income and poverty status of 
Gulf War veterans.

•  Comparing poverty and unemployment estimates 

for women and men working in different occupa-
tional categories.

•  Tracking trends in state-to-state migration among 

baby boomers since the Great Recession.

•  Analyzing data for more detailed languages 

than those available through published tables in 
<https://data.census.gov>.

4   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
4   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau2. PUBLIC USE MICRODATA AREAS

The nation, regions, divisions, states, and Public Use 
Microdata Areas, or PUMAs, are the only geographic 
areas identified in the American Community Survey 
(ACS) Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS). PUMAs 
are geographic areas defined specifically for the dis-
semination of PUMS data from the decennial census, 
ACS, and Puerto Rico Community Survey. 

PUMAs were first delineated for the 1990 Census by 
the state data centers (SDCs) in cooperation with 
regional, state, local, and tribal organizations and 
agencies. They are redrawn following each decennial 
census. This means that PUMA identifiers change each 
decade with varying comparability across time. 

In the PUMS files, PUMAs are identified by a five-digit 
code. However, the five-digit codes are not unique 
across states. State identifiers must be used in con-
junction with PUMA codes when working with data for 
multiple states. For example, data users can combine 
the state FIPS code for California (06) with PUMA 
code 07701 to extract records for the San Joaquin 
County (Central)—Stockton City (North) PUMA. A 
complete list of 2010 PUMA codes and descriptions is 
available on the U.S. Census Bureau’s Web site.7 

PUMA boundaries are defined using three main crite-
ria: 

1.  Each PUMA must have a population of 100,000 or 

more at the time of delineation, and that popula-
tion threshold must be maintained throughout the 
decade. Areas that are experiencing substantial 
population decline at the time of delineation (or 
where decline is anticipated) are delineated to 
include a population greater than 100,000 per-
sons. If the population falls substantially below 
100,000 in a given PUMA, the Census Bureau may 
combine that PUMA with one or more adjacent 
PUMAs to ensure data confidentiality. 

2.  PUMAs are based only on aggregations of coun-
ties and census tracts and cannot cross state 
boundaries. 

3.  The building blocks for PUMAs must be con-

tiguous—or share a common border—unless the 

features of the counties or census tracts used as 
building blocks are noncontiguous (for example, 
islands). As long as population criteria are met, 
one county may be designated as a PUMA. 
Contiguous census tracts may be aggregated to 
create a PUMA, as can two or more contiguous 
counties. Tract-based PUMAs may cross county 
boundaries, provided each PUMA-county part 
meets a minimum population of 2,400. 

In addition to the required criteria, the Census Bureau 
strongly encourages the SDCs to incorporate the fol-
lowing guidelines in their PUMA definitions: 

•  Wherever possible, each PUMA should comprise 

an area either entirely inside or entirely outside 
metropolitan or micropolitan statistical areas. 

• 

2010 place definitions, 2010 urban/rural defini-
tions, and local knowledge should inform PUMA 
delineations.

•  PUMAs should not contain more than 200,000 

people, unless identified as an area that is likely to 
undergo substantial population decline over the 
decade.

•  PUMAs should avoid unnecessarily splitting 

American Indian reservations (AIRs) and/or off-
reservation trust lands (ORTLs), and separating 
American Indian populations particularly if large 
numbers of American Indians are included within 
all parts of the split AIRs/ORTLs. 

Given the various criteria and guidelines for defining 
PUMA boundaries, counties with large populations 
typically are subdivided into multiple PUMAs, while 
PUMAs in more rural areas usually comprise two or 
more adjacent counties.8 Figure 2.1 shows four PUMAs 
located within Douglas County, Nebraska. In contrast, 
Figure 2.2 shows a single PUMA in Alabama (PUMA 
00100) that spans four counties. Three of these coun-
ties (Colbert, Franklin, and Lauderdale) are fully con-
tained within the PUMA, while one county (Marion) is 
only partially contained within the PUMA.

7 U.S. Census Bureau, 2010 PUMA Names, <https://www2.census 

.gov/geo/pdfs/reference/puma/2010_PUMA_Names.pdf>. 

8 For more information, see the Census Bureau’s Final Public Use 
Microdata Area (PUMA) Criteria and Guidelines for the 2010 Census 
and the American Community Survey, <https://www2.census.gov/geo 
/pdfs/reference/puma/2010_puma_guidelines.pdf>. 

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   5 
What Data Users Need to Know    5

U.S. Census BureauFigure 2.1. PUMAs in Douglas County, Nebraska 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

Figure 2.2. Alabama PUMA 00100 (Lauderdale, Colbert, Franklin, and Northeast Marion Counties)

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

6   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
6   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauPlace of Work and Migration PUMAs

For example:

Place of work (POW) PUMAs and Migration (MIG) 
PUMAs are used in the publication of ACS PUMS files 
to provide data on place of work, in- and out-migration 
flows, and demographic characteristics of workers 
and migrants. POWPUMAs identify the location of a 
respondent’s primary place of work, while MIGPUMAs 
identify a respondent’s place of residence 1 year ago. 

POWPUMAs and MIGPUMAs follow the same sets of 
boundaries and codes, but are not always aligned with 
standard PUMAs. Because POWPUMAs/MIGPUMAs 
are county-based, they may contain multiple standard 
PUMAs that have been aggregated together to cre-
ate larger areas in order to protect the confidentiality 
of respondents. In these instances, the POWPUMAs/
MIGPUMAs are assigned unique codes that do not 
match the codes of any standard PUMAs. 

•  POWPUMA/MIGPUMA 51115 in Virginia represents 
an area that covers Stafford County and is exactly 
aligned with Virginia PUMA 51115.

•  POWPUMA/MIGPUMA 51256 in Virginia repre-

sents an area that completely covers Manassas 
and Prince William County. It is an aggregate 
of Virginia PUMAs 51244, 51245, and 51246 (see 
Figure 2.3).

Values and value labels for the POWPUMA and 
MIGPUMA variables are maintained in an Excel 
file under the “Code Lists” heading on the PUMS 

Documentation Web page.9 

9 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

Figure 2.3. Virginia POWPUMA/MIGPUMA 51256 (Manassas and Prince William Counties)

Note: POWPUMA/MIGPUMA 51256 is the area shaded orange in the figure and fully contains PUMAs 51244, 51245, and 51246. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   7 
What Data Users Need to Know    7

U.S. Census BureauChanges to PUMA Boundaries
The Census Bureau redraws PUMA boundaries every 10 
years based on new population data from the decen-
nial census. The 2012 ACS data files were the first to 
include PUMAs defined using the 2010 Census data. 
ACS data files from 2011 and earlier years used the 
PUMAs defined after the 2000 Census. This means 
that the ACS 5-year PUMS files from 2008–2012 
through 2011–2015 include a mix of PUMAs that were 
drawn after the 2000 and 2010 Censuses. The records 
from data years 2008 through 2011 still carry the older 
2000-based PUMA codes, while the records from 2012 
and later years display the newer 2010-based PUMA 
geography.

Guidance for working with these dual-vintage 
PUMA codes is available in the ACS 5-year PUMS 
Documentation (“PUMS ReadMe” files) for 2009–2013 
through 2011–2015.10 

Data users can also use PUMA Maps and equivalence 
files, described below, to visualize PUMA boundaries 
over time or calculate the proportion of a population 
from a 2010-based PUMA that lies within a 2000-
based PUMA.

PUMA Maps and Equivalency Files 

There are several tools available to help users under-
stand and visualize PUMA definitions and boundaries.

TIGERweb is a Web-based application that pro-
vides a simple way to visualize TIGER (Topologically 
Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing 
database) data for PUMAs and other geographic 
areas.11 For example, ACS data users can use this tool 
to see how 2000- and 2010-based PUMAs nest within 
or across counties and cities. 

10 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

11 U.S. Census Bureau, TIGERweb, <https://tigerweb.geo.census 

.gov/tigerwebmain/TIGERweb_apps.html>.

The 2010 Census PUMA Reference Maps can be used 
to display maps for each of the 2,378 2010-based 
PUMAs.12 In addition to the boundaries and codes 
for PUMAs, these maps provide the names of federal 
AIRs, ORTLs, states and state equivalents, counties 
and county equivalents, county subdivisions (in states 
where they function as governmental units), places, 
and census tracts. 

The 2010 PUMA Equivalency Files show the relation-
ship between 2010 PUMAs and 2010 counties, and 
some standard 2010 Census geographic entities such 
as governmental minor civil divisions, places, and cen-
sus tracts.13 Because 2010 PUMAs nest within states, 
there is a separate geographic equivalency file for 
each state. 

The Tract to PUMA Relationship File allows users to 
identify which census tracts are contained within each 
PUMA.14 

The Missouri Census Data Center’s Geocorr 2018 
Geographic Correspondence Engine enables users to 
produce a geographic correspondence file, or cross-
walk, between PUMAs and dozens of geographic 
layers.15 The database includes both 2000- and 2010-
based PUMAs. Geocorr 2018 instructs the user to 
identify a source geography (such as PUMAs) and a 
target geography (for example, counties). The user 
is provided an allocation factor, which indicates the 
portion of the source area that falls within the target 
geography. 

12 U.S. Census Bureau, Geography Reference Maps, <www.census 

.gov/geo/maps-data/maps/reference.html>. 

13 U.S. Census Bureau, Geography Program, Public Use Microdata 

Areas (PUMAs), <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography 
/guidance/geo-areas/pumas.html>. 

14 U.S. Census Bureau, Geographies, Relationship Files,  

<www.census.gov/geographies/reference-files/2010/geo/relationship 
-files.html>.

15 Missouri Census Data Center, Geocorr 2018: Geographic 
Correspondence Engine, <http://mcdc.missouri.edu/applications 
/geocorr2018.html>. 

8   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
8   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau3. ACCESSING ACS PUMS DATA

Data users can access the American Community Survey 
(ACS) Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) files 
through the U.S. Census Bureau’s “Accessing PUMS 
Data” Web page (see Figure 3.1).16 First, select a year 
of interest in the year tabs. From there, you can click 

on the link under "Access on FTP site" to navigate to 
the PUMS files on the Census Bureau's FTP site. You 
can also click on a link under "Access on data.census.
gov" to access the PUMS data files using the microdata 
access tool on data.census.gov, the Census Bureau's 
dissemination tool.

16 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 
Accessing PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs 
/microdata/access.html>. 

Figure 3.1. Accessing ACS PUMS Data

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Accessing PUMS Data, <www.census.gov/programs 
-surveys/acs/microdata/access.html>.

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   9 
What Data Users Need to Know    9

U.S. Census BureauFrom the FTP site, you have already selected your 
desired year and data set of interest (see Figure 3.1).17 
ACS 1-year PUMS data sets for 2005 and later years 
contain data on approximately 1 percent of the  
U.S. population, while ACS 5-year PUMS files for 
2005–2009 and later years contain data on approxi-
mately 5 percent of the population.  

FTP site are stored as ZIP files. The naming convention 
for PUMS files on the FTP server is based on three file 
features: the file format, the record type, and the state 
abbreviation.
•  File formats are comma separated value files (CSV) 

and SAS data sets for UNIX.

•  Record types are housing files (h) or person files 

The next step is to download the data set(s) of inter-
est (see Figure 3.2). PUMS files on the Census Bureau’s 

17 The Census Bureau previously released 3-year estimates based 
on 36 months of data collection. In 2015, the 3-year products were dis-
continued. The 2011–2013 ACS 3-year estimates, released in 2014, are 
the last release of this product. 

(p).

•  State (or state equivalent) abbreviations are two 
letter labels such as “tx” for Texas and “dc” for 
District of Columbia. The abbreviation for the file 
containing all records in the United States is “us.”

Figure 3.2. Downloading ACS 5-Year PUMS Files From the Census Bureau’s FTP Server

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, FTP server, <https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums/2017/5-Year/>. 

10   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
10   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauPUMS data sets can be downloaded for the entire 
nation, individual states, the District of Columbia, or 
for Puerto Rico. Data for Puerto Rico are not included 
in the national files. To create a complete national data 
set, you need to combine two or more files together. 
The 1-year data are divided into two files—an “a” and a 
“b” file—while the 5-year PUMS is divided into “a,” “b,” 
“c,” and “d” files. 

TIP: If you only need data for a single state or a few 
states,  you  can  save  hard  disk  space  and  computer-
processing  time  by  downloading  data  only  for  those 
areas rather than the entire nation. For example, the 
2016 ACS 1-year PUMS SAS data set for the nation as 
a whole—including all person and housing records—is 
4.0  GB  in  size,  while  the  2012–2016  ACS  5-year  data 
set is 18.8 GB in size.

in the housing unit sample, plus the persons selected 
from the GQ sample. Each GQ record is assigned a 
unique SERIALNO, and data users cannot determine 
whether two individuals reside in the same GQ.

The population records contain information about 
individuals such as age, marital status, and educational 
attainment. The population data set includes one 
record for each individual in each sampled household 
or group quarters. Because PUMS data sets are large, 
you should only download the records that you need. 
If you need both housing and population records, then 
you need to download both files and merge them 
together. (See the section on “Preparing ACS PUMS 
Data Files for Analysis” for more information.)

Click on the selected data set to download the PUMS 
data. The data set is provided as a compressed ZIP file 
along with a README document that provides infor-
mation about how to start using PUMS data. 

Housing and Population Records

The ACS PUMS data sets are hierarchical, with separate 
records for housing units and population. The hous-
ing records include information about the housing 
unit—such as the number of rooms, whether the unit 
is vacant, access to the Internet, and mortgage pay-
ments—and household characteristics such as house-
hold income and the presence of children. The housing 
data set contains one record for each sampled house-
hold.  

Microdata Access on Data.census.gov

The Census Bureau recently launched a new microdata 
access tool on data.census.gov that may be used to 
generate ACS estimates online without the use of 
statistical software. This tool is still under development 
and in beta form on the Census Bureau's Web site.18 
The Census Bureau created a step-by-step guide on 
how to use this tool to produce custom estimates from 
the ACS 1-year PUMS file.19 

The basic unit in the ACS PUMS is an individual hous-
ing unit. The PUMS also includes a sample of people 
living in group quarters (GQ). The population sample 
is defined as all persons living in households selected 

18 U.S. Census Bureau, Microdata Access Tool, <https://data.census 

.gov/mdat/>.

19 U.S. Census Bureau, Using Microdata Access, <https://www2 

.census.gov/data/api-documentation/using-microdata-access 
/microdata-access-1-year-acs-pums.pdf>.

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   11 
What Data Users Need to Know    11

U.S. Census Bureau 
4. PREPARING ACS PUMS DATA FILES FOR 
ANALYSIS 

The data dictionary available on the PUMS 
Documentation Web page includes the complete 
list of variables in the American Community Survey 
(ACS) Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) data 

sets and additional documentation to help data users 
work with the files (see Figure 4.1).20 

20 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

Figure 4.1. ACS PUMS Documentation

U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/microdata/documentation.html>.

12   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
12   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census BureauThe PUMS Documentation is organized by year of data 
release and includes several useful resources:

•  PUMS ReadMe is updated with each data release 

and includes information about geography and 
variable changes, as well as guidance for getting 
started in using the ACS PUMS files. 

•  Subjects in the PUMS provides a list of the subjects 

that are included in the ACS PUMS files. 

Working with Data for the Entire United 
States

The national ACS PUMS data sets contain millions of 
records and are very large. As a result, data sets for 
the entire United States are split into multiple files—“a” 
and “b” files for the ACS 1-year PUMS, and “a,” “b,” “c,” 
and “d” files for the ACS 5-year PUMS. Data users must 
combine these component data files together to create 
a complete data set for the United States.

•  PUMS Data Dictionary includes a list of all the 

variables in the ACS PUMS files, their values, and 
descriptions of what those values mean. The ACS 
PUMS data set includes variables for nearly every 
topic included in the ACS, as well as variables 
that were created by combining multiple survey 
responses.

•  Code Lists provides detailed codes for variables 
with a long list of coded responses (for example, 
occupation or ancestry).

•  PUMS Top Coded and Bottom Coded Values is a 

list of all the variables that have been top- and/or 
bottom-coded, and a list of state-specific values 
for the top- and bottom-coded variables. (More 
information about top-coding and bottom-coding 
is provided below.) 

•  Accuracy of the PUMS explains the sample design, 

estimation methodology, and the accuracy of the 
data. This section also includes instructions for 
calculating standard errors and margins of error 
for ACS PUMS estimates. (See the section on “Data 
Quality in the ACS PUMS” for more information.)

•  PUMS Estimates for User Verification are weighted 
national- and state-level estimates, standard errors, 
and margins of error for several characteristics that 
data users can use to confirm that PUMS data files 
have been set up correctly.  

PUMS data can be analyzed using a variety of statisti-
cal software packages (for example, SPSS, SAS, R, or 
Stata). In the examples below, SAS programming code 
is used to prepare the ACS PUMS data for analysis.

Here is a SAS statement that concatenates the “a” and 
“b” files for the ACS 1-year PUMS population records:

/*Concatenate a and b population records to obtain 
all U.S. PUMS person records*/ 
data us_pums_person_data; 
set psam_pusa psam_pusb; 
run;

Data for individual states, the District of Columbia, and 
for Puerto Rico are also available as separate popula-
tion data sets. When working with data for a single 
state, there are no “a” and “b” files, so data users can 
skip this step.

Combining Housing and Population 
Data

While some analyses can be conducted using only 
the housing data or population data, there are other 
instances where data users need to link housing unit 
records to population records. For example, housing 
unit records include data on the number of vehicles 
available, but to identify the characteristics of people 
who may have access to those vehicles, you need to 
link the housing unit records to the population records. 

To combine the housing unit and population records, 
merge the two data sets together by matching on 
the SERIALNO variable. The SERIALNO variable is 
unique for each housing unit record across the nation. 
Matching on this variable merges the housing unit vari-
ables onto the population records. 

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   13 
What Data Users Need to Know    13

U.S. Census Bureau 
Selecting Appropriate Weights

Each housing and person record is assigned a weight, 
because the records in the PUMS files represent a sam-
ple of the population. The weight is a numeric variable 
expressing the number of housing units or people that 
an individual microdata record represents. The sum of 
the housing unit and person weights for a geographic 
area is equal to the estimate of the total number of 
housing units and people in that area. To generate 
estimates based on the PUMS records, data users must 
correctly apply weights. 

TIP: To generate statistics for housing units or house-
holds  (for  example,  data  on  average  household 
income), data users should apply the PUMS household 
weights (WGTP). To generate statistics for individuals 
(such  as  age  or  educational  attainment),  data  users 
should apply the PUMS person weights (PWGTP).  

When working with a merged file that includes both 
housing and person records, person weights should be 
used to produce estimates for person characteristics. 
Housing characteristics cannot be tallied from this 
merged file without taking extra steps to ensure that 
each housing weight is counted only once per house-
hold.

There are two additional sets of weights, one for 
households ranging from WGTP1 to WGTP80, and one 
for individuals ranging from PWGTP1 to PWGTP80. 
These “replicate weights” are used to calculate the 
error associated with each estimate. For more informa-
tion about replicate weights, see the section below on 
“Data Quality in the ACS PUMS.”

Here is a portion of a SAS program that merges housing 
and population records:

/*Concatenate a and b housing records to obtain all 
US PUMS housing records*/ 
data us_pums_housing_data; 
 set psam_husa psam_husb; 
run;

/*Sort the housing and population records by 
SERIALNO*/ 
proc sort data=us_pums_housing_data; 
by SERIALNO; 
run; 
proc sort data=us_pums_person_data; 
by SERIALNO; 
run;

/*merge the housing and population records 
together*/ 
data merged; 
merge us_pums_person_data us_pums_housing_data; 
by SERIALNO; 
run;

Merging the housing and population records yields a 
population-level data set that can be used to estimate 
the number or share of people with various household-
based characteristics.21 

Within households, data for each household member 
are included in separate person-level records. However, 
data users may be interested in producing estimates 
that combine data from multiple household members. 
For example, you may want to know the proportion 
of spouses who have the same level of educational 
attainment. The steps involved in joining these records 
are shown in Appendix A.

21 Note that the housing unit data contain vacant housing units. 

These records will not have any corresponding person records.

14   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
14   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
Selecting Variables
The PUMS Data Dictionary is available for each ACS 
PUMS data set and includes a complete list of the 
variables in the PUMS data files.22 For each variable, 
the data dictionary includes the variable name, value 
type and length, variable description, values, and value 
labels (see Figure 4.2). The “bb” values indicate that 
data on educational attainment are not available for 
persons under the age of 3.

Some variables, such as ancestry, have a large number 
of coded responses. In addition to the data diction-
ary, values and value labels for these variables are 
maintained in a separate Excel file listed under “Code 
Lists” on the PUMS Documentation Web page.23 
The Code Lists show the detailed ACS codes that 
are included in each value for a PUMS variable. For 
example, the “German” ancestry code in the 2017 ACS 
PUMS includes a range of related responses, such as 
“German,” “Saxon,” and “West German” (see Table 4.3).

22 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

23 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

Figure 4.2. Elements of a Sample Variable in the ACS PUMS Data Dictionary

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2017 ACS PUMS Data Dictionary, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.2017.html>.

Table 4.3. German Ancestry Codes in the 2017 ACS 1-Year PUMS 

PUMS code

Ancestry description

Ancestry code

Corresponding detailed ancestry code

032

German

032

033

034

035

036

037

038

039

041

042

043

044

045

German

Bavaria

Berlin

Hamburg

Hannover

Hessian

Lubecker

Pomeranian

Saxon

Sudetenlander

Westphalian

East German

West German

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, PUMS Documentation, 2017 ACS 1-year PUMS Code Lists, 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata/documentation.2017.html>.

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   15 
What Data Users Need to Know    15

U.S. Census BureauWhile the PUMS data dictionary provides the 
coded responses for each variable, the ACS Subject 
Definitions provide information about the meaning of 
each ACS variable or subject.24 The subject definitions 
include information about how variables are defined 
and measured, the population universe, the survey 
questions used to derive each variable, how variables 
may have changed over time, and the comparability 
with ACS and decennial census variables from previ-
ous years.25 These definitions apply to both ACS PUMS 
data, as well as pretabulated ACS data on the U.S. 
Census Bureau’s Web site.

Top-Coded and Bottom-Coded 
Variables

ACS responses are strictly confidential. In addition 
to removing all identifying information, responses to 
open-ended questions, such as age, income, and hous-
ing unit value—where an extreme value might identify 
an individual—are top-coded and/or bottom-coded. 
Top-coding is the process of taking any response 
exceeding a particular value and replacing it with a 
predetermined value. These predetermined values dif-
fer by state. For example, for 2017, if someone in New 
York reports their age as 103, it will be reported in the 
ACS PUMS file as 95 (the top-coded value shown for 
New York). Refer to PUMS Top Coded and Bottom 
Coded Values in the PUMS Documentation for the list 
of impacted variables and the predetermined values in 
each state.26 

24 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Code 
Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys 
/acs/technical-documentation/code-lists.html>.

PUMS Estimates for User Verification

PUMS data users are responsible for the accuracy of 
their estimates. Because PUMS data consist of a subset 
of the full ACS sample, tabulations from the ACS PUMS 
will not match those from published tables of ACS 
data. You can verify that you have correctly accessed 
and tabulated data from the ACS PUMS file by replicat-
ing the values presented in “PUMS Estimates for User 
Verification” in the PUMS Documentation.27 

The PUMS estimates for user verification include 
weighted estimates for selected characteristics and 
associated standard errors and margins of error. The 
standard errors and margins of errors were calculated 
using the Successive Difference Replicate method 
(described in the next section). The estimates are 
produced for the United States and for each state, the 
District of Columbia, and for Puerto Rico. They are 
available in SAS and comma-separated value (CSV) 
formats.  

Beginning in 2017, the user verification files for the ACS 
PUMS also include a CSV file with unweighted counts 
of the number of records in each PUMS file. Data users 
may verify that the number of records in their PUMS 
person or housing file match the number given in this 
file.28 

25 The Census Bureau’s subject definitions were created primarily 
for use with published tables, and some of these definitions are not 
applicable to the variables in the PUMS.

27 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>. 

26 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>. 

28 Previously, the number of records for the United States and 
Puerto Rico combined was provided at the beginning of the PUMS 
“Accuracy of the PUMS” document.

16   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
16   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau5. DATA QUALITY IN THE ACS PUMS

The weighted estimates calculated using the Public 
Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) files are estimates 
of the entire population. The degree of uncertainty 
associated with American Community Survey (ACS) 
estimates, known as sampling error, tends to be large 
when the sample size is small. Indeed, PUMS estimates 
are subject to additional sampling error because the 
PUMS data consist of a subsample of the full ACS 
sample. Researchers using the PUMS files must calcu-
late their own measures of uncertainty in addition to 
producing their own estimates.  

One way to quickly evaluate your results from the ACS 
PUMS is to reproduce the estimates without using 
weights. By examining the unweighted counts, you can 
see if there are any cells based on just a few sample 
cases, which are less likely to yield statistically reliable 
weighted estimates. 

However, most researchers want to calculate more 
formal measures of sampling error such as standard 
errors, margins of error, and confidence intervals. Both 
the margin of error and the confidence interval can 
be calculated based on the standard error. For more 
information about sampling error in the ACS, see the 
section on “Understanding Error and Determining 
Statistical Significance” in the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
handbook on Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to 
Know.29

There are two ways to calculate standard errors for 
ACS PUMS estimates. The first is a generalized variance 
formula (GVF) that uses design factors. The second is a 
successive difference replicate (SDR) method that uses 
the replicate weights. The Census Bureau uses the SDR 
method to calculate margins of error for published 
ACS tables.

Generalized Standard Error Formula 

Generalized standard errors are model-based. They 
are, therefore, considered less accurate than direct 
standard errors calculated with the replicate weight 
method, although they may be easier to calculate for 
some data users. 

PUMS document provided with each ACS PUMS data 
release.30 To calculate GVF standard errors, design 
factors are applied to reflect the effects of the actual 
ACS sample design and estimation procedures.31 Prior 
to 2017, the design factors for PUMS subject groups 
and state are available in the PUMS accuracy docu-
ment. Beginning with 2017 data, the design factors are 
provided in a comma separated value (CSV) file.  

ACS estimates (and their corresponding standard 
errors) may be generated from two or more variables 
representing different subject areas. When more than 
one subject is involved in the analysis, use the larg-
est design factor for the factors being considered. For 
example, an estimate of the population under the age 
of 21 living below poverty is derived from ACS vari-
ables on age and poverty status. The design factor 
for “Poverty Status (Person),” at 1.9, is larger than the 
design factor for “Age,” at 1.0, so the design factor for 
poverty should be used to calculate the standard error 
for this estimate. The only exception to this rule is for 
items cross-tabulated by race or Hispanic origin. For 
those items, use the largest design factor not including 
the race or Hispanic origin design factor. 

Successive Difference Replicate Formula 
(Replicate Weights)  

One benefit of using the SDR method is that a single 
formula can be used to calculate standard errors for 
many different types of ACS estimates, such as counts, 
aggregates, percentages, and ratios. However, the 
SDR method may be inconvenient for some data users 
because of the computational requirements. 

The SDR method uses the 80 replicate weights to cal-
culate 80 replicate estimates. These replicate estimates 
use the replicate weights. For the PUMS person files, 
they are called PWGTP1 through PWGTP80. For the 
housing files, the replicate weights are WGTP1 through 
WGTP80. Note that these weights are used solely for 
calculating uncertainty. They should never be used to 
calculate an estimate.

The first step is to generate an ACS estimate of inter-
est using the PUMS weight (PWGTP or WGTP). Next, 

The Census Bureau provides formulas to approxi-
mate GVF standard errors in the Accuracy of the 

29 U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using American 
Community Survey Data: What All Data Users Need to Know,  
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance/handbooks 
/general.html>. 

30 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

31 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Code 
Lists, Definitions, and Accuracy, 2016 ACS 1-year Accuracy of the Data, 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/
code-lists.2016.html>. 

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   17 
What Data Users Need to Know    17

U.S. Census Bureaugenerate this estimate 80 times, using each of the 80 
different replicate weights. Once you have these 81 
estimated values, you can calculate the standard error 
by using the following formula: 

Accuracy of the PUMS documentation.32 The PUMS 
Estimates for User Verification include examples of 
standard errors that were calculated based on the rep-
licate weight method.33 

80

𝑆𝑆𝐸𝐸(𝑋𝑋) = √

4
80

2

∑(𝑋𝑋𝑟𝑟 − 𝑋𝑋
𝑟𝑟=1

)

where:

X = the estimate based on the PUMS weight  
      (PWGTP or WGTP).

Xr = the 80 individual estimates based on each  
        of the replicate weights.

More details about calculating standard errors using 
the replicate weight method can be found in the 

Data users interested in worked examples based on 
the replicate weight method can also consult the doc-
umentation for the ACS Variance Replicate Tables.34 
These tables are intended for advanced users who are 
aggregating pretabulated ACS data and want to calcu-
late exact margins of error.

32 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

33 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), PUMS 
Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>.

34 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 

Variance Replicate Tables Documentation, <www.census.gov/programs 
-surveys/acs/technical-documentation/variance-tables.html>. 

18   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
18   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
6. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

ACS PUMS Documentation 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/microdata 
/documentation.html>

This Web page includes information about the 
American Community Survey (ACS) Public Use 
Microdata Sample (PUMS), as well as the PUMS techni-
cal documentation.

U.S. Census Bureau, Understanding and Using 
American Community Survey Data: What All Data 
Users Need to Know 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/guidance 
/handbooks/general.html>

This handbook provides an overview of the ACS to 
help data users understand the basics of the survey, 
how the data can be used, how to judge the accuracy 
of ACS estimates, and how to access ACS data.

Webinar: Calculating Margins of Error the ACS Way 
<www.census.gov/data/academy/webinars/2020 
/calculating-margins-of-error-acs.html>

In this Webinar, U.S. Census Bureau staff discuss how 
to calculate variances, standard errors, and margins 
of error using the Successive Difference Replicate 
method.

Webinar: Introduction to the Public Use Microdata 
Sample (PUMS) File  
<www.census.gov/data/academy/webinars/2020 
/introduction-to-american-community-survey-public 
-use-microdata-sample-pums-files.html>

In this Webinar, U.S Census Bureau staff discuss  
foundational aspects of working with the ACS PUMS 
files, including the organization of the files, the confi-
dentiality of the files, accessing the data, geographic 
availability, and the PUMS documentation. This 
Webinar also explores how to use new features on 
data.census.gov to create custom PUMS tables.

Geography and ACS 
<www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/geography 
-acs.html>

This Web page includes information about changes in 
geographic boundaries in the ACS, key concepts and 
definitions, and reference maps.

Using Microdata Access 
<https://www2.census.gov/data/api-documentation 
/using-microdata-access/microdata-access-1-year-acs 
-pums.pdf>

This document provides a step-by-step guide for using 
microdata access on data.census.gov to create your 
own tables using the ACS PUMS files.

ACS Online Community 
<https://acsdatacommunity.prb.org/>

The ACS Online Community is a site where people can 
share messages, materials, and announcements related 
to ACS data, methods, and events.

Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files   19 
What Data Users Need to Know    19

U.S. Census BureauAPPENDIX A: LINKING 
HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS 
TOGETHER

To link records for married couples that include the 
householder, first identify the relevant variables for the 
analysis. In this example, the variables HHT (household 
type), RELP (relationship to householder), and MAR 
(marital status) can be used to identify married house-
holders and their spouses. SCHL (educational attain-
ment) can be used to measure educational attainment.

Next, create separate data files for each person that 
will be linked together. For each of these data files, 
rename the variables so they are unique for each 
person. Keep only the identifiers and person-specific 
variables that will be used in the analysis.

Following these steps produces a data file of married 
couples based only on the householder and his or 
her spouse. There may be additional married couples 
within a household—called subfamilies—that can be 
identified with the subfamily relationship variable. To 
create a data file that includes all married couples, 
data users will need to follow similar steps to iden-
tify married couples in subfamilies and link spouses 
together. 

Here is a portion of a SAS program that identifies mar-
ried householders and their spouses.

/*Create a person file of householder, which is the 
reference person*/

data householder; 
 keep serialno reference h_schl h_mar h_pwgtp; 
  set psam_pus; 
if hht in (1,2,3) and relp=’00’ and mar=’1’;

/*define householder and set it equal to 1 for the 
householder */; 
reference=1; 
/*Create variables for the householder/reference 
person; 
   These variables will start with ‘h_’*/; 
h_schl=schl; 
h_mar=mar; 
h_pwgtp=pwgtp; 
run;

/*Create a data file of spouses*/ 
data household_spouse; 
 keep serialno spouse schl s_mar s_pwgtp; 
 set persons; 
if hht in (1,2,3) and relp=’01’ and mar=’1’;

spouse=1; 
s_schl=schl; 
s_mar=mar; 
s_pwgtp=pwgtp; 
run;

/*Sort the data before merging */; 
proc sort data = householder;  
 by SERIALNO; 
proc sort data = household_spouse; 
 by SERIALNO; 
run;

20   Understanding and Using the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample Files 
20   What Data Users Need to Know

U.S. Census Bureau 
